## C.6 DFT detection

A more sophisticated method in practice is to use a pair of filters to detect and track the amplitude of the mark and space frequency signals, using a comparator to decide between a 0 and 1 bit based on the stronger signal. This provides much better rejection of noise due to the filters only being sensitive to the signal frequencies around the FSK tones. It is also more similar to the circuitry in the 410/1010 tape drives, which use analog filters and comparators in a similar manner.

There are many kinds of filters that can be used to detect the FSK tones. Two considerations for choosing the filters are the bandwidth and response time of the filters. To successfully decode a 600 baud stream, the filters need to be sensitive to at least ±300Hz and have a response time below a single bit (1.67ms).

## Frequency binning

The discrete Fourier transform (DFT) can be used to separate the signal into frequency with two of the bins centered on the FSK tones. This is possible because the tones are generated by POKEY by dividing the clock by 28×16 and 28×12, with the result that with an appropriate sampling rate and DFT size, the tones exactly match two of the frequency bins. Using a sampling rate of 31.96KHz (1.79MHz ÷ 56) and a DFT size of 24 points results in a frequency bin width of 1.33KHz, which centers bins 3 and 4 on the FSK frequencies of 4KHz and 5.3KHz. The magnitude of the responses in these two frequency bins can then be subtracted, with the resulting sign determining the output bit.

DC bias and low frequencies are naturally rejected by this technique as they are separated out into lower bins that are ignored or simply not computed. However, the reliance on a fixed sampling rate means that signals at other rates, such as the more common 44.1KHz and 48KHz audio sampling rates, must be resampled first.

## Computing a sliding DFT

To provide sufficient resolution for pulse edges, the DFT needs to be computed on a per-sample basis. Doing this is expensive with a direct DFT. It can be sped up with an FFT, but doing so is complicated by non-power-oftwo transform sizes.

A more efficient way to do so is via a sliding DFT, which takes advantage of the redundancy between transforms one sample part to do a cheaper update from one sample position to the next. Given the direct formula for computing a given frequency bin, both on one sample and the next:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is possible to rewrite the expression for the result of the next sample in terms of the previous:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is a recurrence relation that updates a frequency bin by adding the new sample, removing the sample N points back, and then rotating the bin value by one sample (360/N degrees). As usual for the DFT, the value X k for the frequency bin is a complex number, which is then converted to a magnitude by computing the vector length. Tracking and comparing the magnitudes of the X 3 and X4 bins at each sample then determines whether the output should be a 0 or a 1.

Advantages of the sliding DFT include easy use of non power of two transform sizes and O(1) cost for each update independent of the transform size. However, the above equation has an issue with error accumulation due to the cumulative rotations. As the comparator only needs the magnitude of each frequency bin and is independent of phase, this can be addressed by counter-rotating the frequency bins at each step to cancel the overall rotation, which instead results in only needing to rotate the addend:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There is an issue with error accumulation when this is implemented in floating point, since floating point arithmetic is not associative and so a sample's contribution is not guaranteed to cancel exactly. However, if fixed point is used, the terms for each sample will exactly cancel when added and then later removed from the sliding window. The final update per bin requires three additions and two multiplications, along with an N-sample delay line and a precomputed table of N rotation values. This is much cheaper than a 24-point FFT for the two bins required for FSK decoding.

An alternative to the sliding DFT is the sliding Goertzel DFT, which combines a sliding window with a Goertzel filter. 91 It is cheaper than the sliding DFT when computing bins with the correct phase, but more expensive when only magnitude is needed. Stability and controlling error accumulation are also more difficult due to the IIR filter structure.

## Windowing

The above effectively calculates the DFT with a rectangular window, where the transform abruptly starts and stops at the edges of the window. Although the ideal FSK frequencies align exactly with frequency bins as long as the transform size and sampling rate are chosen appropriately, in practice there is a little bit of spectral leakage which causes a small amount of response to be leaked to or from frequencies far away from the FSK tones.

Windowing is normally used to combat this problem, ramping the signal down to zero or near-zero at the edges of the transform. The Hann window, for instance, multiplies the signal by a raised cosine before the DFT. This is difficult to do with a sliding DFT, however, because the window value for each sample changes as the transform advances over it. This can be worked around by instead applying the window in the frequency domain, since multiplication in time domain is equivalent to convolution in frequency domain. For the Hann window, this is a

[91] [SlidingDFT]

simple three-tap filter:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This requires additional frequency bins to be tracked. It is also possible to implement Hamming and Blackman windows this way. Note that the complex values of the bins must be combined, not the magnitudes.

More troublesome is that this technique doesn't directly work with the rotation trick above, since the X k frequency bin values are out of phase relative to each other compared to a standard DFT and can't be directly combined this way, requiring additional rotation corrections. There is some optimization that can be applied for adjacent bins computed together as they will share unwindowed bins and phase corrections in their calculations. The cost for updating Hann-windowed X3 and X4 values is 24 additions and 16 multiplications.

There is another side effect of windowing, which is reduced resolution as the frequency bins cover wider ranges of frequencies below the low FSK tone and above the high FSK tone. On the other hand, the responses also taper smoothly to zero instead of ringing as with the rectangular window.

In practice, windowing doesn't seem to have a significant effect on FSK decoder effectiveness, and so it's easier and cheaper just to omit it.

