## C.7 Quadrature demodulation

Another FSK decoding method is quadrature demodulation:

- Multiply the signal by a complex sine wave half way in frequency between the FSK tones (4.66KHz) to shift the spectrum down such that the FSK tones are symmetrical around 0Hz at ±0.67KHz.
- Apply a low pass filter to limit the signal to the desired bandwidth around each tone (or equivalently, apply a band pass filter before the previous step). This excludes frequencies far away from the FSK tones, as well as aliasing from the first step.
- Multiply the resulting signal by the complex conjugate of itself, offset by one sample. This effectively computes the phase delta between each sample, which in turn indicates whether the fundamental frequency is above or below the 4.66KHz midpoint.
- Compute the phase of the resulting delta vectors, outputting a 0 bit for negative phase deltas and 1 for positive phase deltas. This can be done without polar conversion by taking the sign of the imaginary component.

Note that all steps above must be done in complex arithmetic, including the frequency shift and the low pass filter.

Quadrature demodulation has some advantages over the sliding DFT technique. Arbitrary sampling rates are easier to accommodate as there is no requirement for a transform window fitting an integer number of cycles, and the bandwidth around the FSK tones can be varied by adjusting the cutoff frequency of the low pass or band pass filter(s). It is somewhat more expensive than the sliding DFT, with the majority of the cost being in the complex valued LPF/BPF - which is around at least 15 taps at 32KHz.

In practice, quadrature demodulation seems to be less effective than the sliding DFT, especially with degraded tape signals. Portions of the signal with dropouts cause problems as the computed phase from the demodulator goes haywire as the signal drops to zero or near-zero, which is handled more gracefully by the DFT. It is less sensitive to amplitude differences between the mark and space tones, however, which can otherwise require manual tuning or an AGC.

