## Appendix A Polynomial Counters

POKEY's noise generators use a form of polynomial counter called a linear feedback shift register . This is a type of pseudo-random number generator that is cheap to implement in hardware and generates a long sequence of bits with a short shift register.

## Feedback polynomials

A polynomial counter is composed of a shift register and a feedback network generating new bits to shift into that register. The feedback network combines multiple bits at various taps on the shift register using an XOR or XNOR function, usually two or four. This then causes the shift register to 'count' through various states. The sequence produced, however, is not in numerical order as it is for a binary counter.

The feedback network can be represented as a characteristic feedback polynomial composed of powers x i , where each power represents a specific tap off the shift register. For instance, a polynomial for a 4-bit counter is as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The '1' corresponds to the newly produced bit, whereas x 3 is the third bit back and x 4 is the fourth bit back. Also, addition is modulo-2 here, or equivalent to XOR. The tap x N always exists for an N-bit counter, or else the top bit would not contribute to sequence length. Thus, the following sequence is generated: 000100110101111.

As noted earlier, XNOR may be used instead of XOR, where XNOR is the inverted result of XOR. XNOR produces an equivalent polynomial counter, except that the feedback and shift register states are inverted.

## Lock-up state

A polynomial counter always has one state that is not generated by the counter sequence. This state is all zeroes for an XOR-based counter and all ones for an XNOR-based counter. The feedback network produces the same bit from this state. This called the lock-up state , because the counter will never advance from this state.

The presence of the lock-up state means that polynomial counters must have a reset mechanism to force at least one bit of the non-lock-up polarity into the shift register. Only one bit is necessary since there is only one lock-up state and reaching any of the other 2 N -1 states is sufficient to re-enter the full cycle.

## Generated sequence

Typically, the polynomial is chosen to produce a maximal-length sequence of 2 N -1 bits for an N bit counter, cycling through all possible states except one. The missing value is due to one state not being generated in the sequence, the all zero state for XOR feedback. This means that the sequence has one fewer 0 bit than 1 bits. The value of any N contiguous bits in the sequence is unique within the sequence.

The sequence length is of consequence when sampling the sequence as regular intervals, as POKEY does when using the polynomial counters for noise generation. Sampling periods that have common factors with the sequence length will reduce the effective sequence length. In particular, POKEY's 4-bit counter has a period of 15 = 5·3, and the 9-bit counter has a period 511 = 73·7.

A polynomial counter does not have to use a maximal-length sequence. Instead, it may use a polynomial which causes the sequence to repeat with a shorter cycle using a subset of states, or additional logic to reset the counter midway through the cycle. POKEY and GTIA contain counters with non-maximal sequence lengths of 28 and 114 from 5-bit and 7-bit counters, respectively. In this case, all of the non-lockup states that are not part of the looping sequence will eventually lead into the loop.

## Polynomial counter simulation

The polynomial for POKEY's 9-bit generator is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is possible to simulate the values produced by the RANDOM register, given one other pieces of information, namely that it shifts right. Given this, the sequence can be generated by the following C code:

```
unsigned v = 0x80; do { printf("%02x\n", v & 0xff); v = (v >> 1) + (((v << (9-1)) ^ (v << (4-1))) & 0x100); } while(v != 0x80);
```

This produces the sequence in the order seen by the 6502, by XORing the bits at both taps together and shifting it in on the left.

## Alternate configuration

Running the feedback in the opposite direction, shifting bits out and XORing them in at each tap, allows for an alternate method of simulation:

```
unsigned v = 1<<8; do { printf("%02x\n", v & 0xff); v >>= 1; if (v & 0x80) v ^= (1 << (9+7)) + (1 << (4+7)); } while((v & (0x1ff << 8)) != 1);
```

This form is easier to simulate in software as the feedback is done via a scatter rather than gather operation. However, while it produces the same sequence of bits, the shift register state is different, and so an extra 8 bits of shift register are necessary to capture the same output values.

This is the same algorithm implemented in 6502 code:

```
lda #0 sta xrandom ;initialize random output lda #1 ;initialize shift register bits 0-7 clc ;initialize shift register bit 8 loop: ror ;shift php ;save shift register bit 8 ror xrandom ;contains newly generated byte plp ;restore shift register bit 8 bcc loop ;skip if 0 bit shifted out eor #$08 ;xor in x^4 tap (x^9 tap done via carry) bcs loop ;continue
```

## Seeking to arbitrary positions

A shortcoming of the above algorithms is that they are limited to sequentially producing states. This is fine for noise generation or building tables, but can be a hassle when random access by position is needed. Fortunately, it is also possible to compute the shift register's state at any position in O(log 2 N) time.

The alternate simulation algorithm works by storing base-2 polynomials in binary numbers, where each bit i represents an element x i in a polynomial. That means the algorithm computes the following in base-2 polynomial arithmetic:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

x i, , in turn, can be represented as the product of powers of two, i.e. x 0 , x 1 , x 2 , x 4 , x 8 , etc. That leads to the following strategy:

- Precompute a table of x 2^i  mod M.
- Given a position P, multiply together the appropriate values of  x 2^i mod M for each bit i set in P to determine the shift register state at position P.
- Run the shift register from that position to retrieve the desired output stream bits.

This is most useful with the 17-bit shift register (x 17 +x 12 +1), whose output sequence can be too impractically large to precompute. The following C code generates the register values seen by RANDOM after exiting initialization mode, with the 17-bit shift register enabled:

```
uint32_t powers[17]; uint32_t polymul(uint32_t x, uint32_t y, uint32_t base, uint32_t hibit) { uint32_t accum = 0; while(y) { if (y & 1) accum ^= x; y >>= 1; x <<= 1; if (x & hibit) x ^= base; } return accum; } uint32_t polyeval17(uint32_t idx, uint32_t initial_state) { uint32_t x = initial_state; for(int i=0; i<17; ++i) { if (idx & 1) x = polymul(x, powers[i], 0x21001, 0x20000); idx >>= 1; } return x; } int main() { // precompute powers of 2 mod polynomial powers[0] = 2; for(int i=1; i<17; ++i) powers[i] = polymul(powers[i-1], powers[i-1], 0x21001, 0x20000); // evaluate RANDOM at every possible position
```

```
for(int i=0; i<131071; ++i) { uint32_t v = polyeval17((131071 - i + 4) % 131071, 0x1FFFF) << 8; for(int j=0; j<8; ++j) { v >>= 1; if (v & 0x80) v ^= (1 << (17+7)) + (1 << (12+7)); } printf("%02x\n", v & 0xff); } }
```

