## E.3 First amplifier stage

The first amplifier stage after POKEY's output has the greatest effect on the shape of the audio signal due to its input being AC coupled through a capacitor. This has the effect of applying a high-pass filter with an approximate time constant of 2.6 ms. A high-pass filter blocks DC signals entirely (constant levels) and attenuates (reduces) low frequency components more than high frequency components. In a signal waveform, it converts square pulses to exponential decay curves. The first amplifier stage has the faster decay curve of the two stages and is more responsible for limiting the bass output from POKEY.

The exponential decay curve is the result of the capacitor charging or discharging based on the difference in voltage across the capacitor, which increases when POKEY's output changes and decreases as the capacitor gradually charges or discharges. As the voltage difference decreases, the rate of change in voltage decreases, which causes the curve to gradually level off according to the formula:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Tau (τ) is the time constant, which determines the rate of decay of the curve. It is the amount of time for the curve to reach 1/e = 36.8% of its original value, or 63.2% toward its target. After 2τ periods, the curve is at 1/e 2 = 13.5% or 86.4% to the target. Given a constant non-zero input, the output takes infinite time to converge, but it quickly reaches a point where the difference is negligible. After 12τ, the remaining difference is 6×10 -6 , which is below half a step for 16-bit sampled audio. This means that any constant level output (DC bias) from POKEY is quickly eliminated.

This type of high-pass filter is linear . One consequence of this is that the filter is invariant to both time shifts and changes in amplitude - shifting or amplifying the input results in the same time shift or gain on the output. It also means that the high-pass of the sum of two signals is the same as the sum of the two signals individually highpass filtered.

A quick transformation converts the time constant to other useful periods. Multiplying by ln(2) gives the half life, the time for the output or output difference to halve. Multiplying by a sampling rate gives the decay factor at that rate, which can then be used for discrete simulation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

