## E.5 Second amplifier stage

Anti-aliasing

The second amplifier stage is downstream of all audio inputs and handles the full audio signal. All of its inputs are also AC coupled and show similar decay effects, which removes any DC bias over time and ensures that the output eventually drops to zero with quiet input. The decay is much slower than the first stage with a time constant of approximately 24.7 ms. This effect can be most clearly seen when playing a square wave through GTIA's CONSOL bit 3 on an XL/XE machine, which only shows the decay effect from the second stage amplifier.

Figure 28: Decay from second stage amplifier

<!-- image -->

A square wave played on CONSOL bit 3 on an NTSC 800XL, sampled from the monitor jack audio output. The square wave period is 40 ms per cycle (20 ms per pulse).

The combination of the different decay curves from the two amplifier stages can result in a mild overshoot effect, where the faster decay of the first stage causes the output signal to cross the zero level slightly before the slower decay of the second stage cancels the overshoot.

A clamping effect can also occur in the second amplifier when the input signal has high amplitude, clipping peaks of the input signal. This effect is shown in Figure 29.

Figure 29: Dynamic clamping effect

<!-- image -->

Signal capture from an NTSC 800XL playing a square wave on all four channels at maximum volume. CH1 (yellow) is POKEY output, CH2 (cyan) is at the output of the first stage amplifier at R2, CH3 (purple) is at the input of the second amplifier at R7, and CH4 (blue) is the final signal from the monitor audio output. CH2 (cyan) shows the change in waveform shape from the first amplifier stage; CH4 (blue) shows the saturation effect in the second stage as the amplifier gradually eliminates the error shown in CH3 (purple).

The clamping effect is asymmetrical, with the amplifier able to output a more negative signal than positive (more headroom toward high POKEY total volume / 0V). For a normalized max POKEY volume of 1, the approximate clamping range is [-0.50, +0.65], with more excursion toward higher volume levels. However, it is important to note that this clamp is based on the output of the first amplifier, so it clips dynamic peaks rather than simply high volume levels. The limit at +0.65 is easily hit by a high total volume level alone, but the limit at -0.50 is only seen dynamically when the total output swings back to from high to low levels.

For example, a single channel playing audio at volume levels 0-15 will generally not show clipping. If audio is momentarily played at a high volume level of 40-60, though, it will shift the reference voltage such that upon returning to the 0-15 range, the second amplifier will see a spike in the opposite direction, then momentarily clamping some of the low volume levels and causing some distortion until the reference swings back. This is of most consequence when playing audio on multiple channels since POKEY's volume control is unbalanced and higher volume levels introduce DC bias into POKEY's output.

