## 8.1 Cartridge slot

## Slot types

The original 800 computer model had two cartridge ports, a left cartridge slot and a right cartridge slot. Both were physically the same but were wired slightly differently. A cartridge could be inserted into either, but typically would only work in a specific slot, with the vast majority of cartridges only worked in the left cartridge slot. All other models, including the 400, XL/XE models, and the XEGS only had a left cartridge slot.

## Address regions

Cartridges are accessed through three memory address windows:

- Left cartridge: $A000-BFFF
- Right cartridge: $8000-9FFF
- Cartridge control (CCTL): $D500-D5FF

The left cartridge slot can map to all three regions, while the right cartridge slot can only map to the right cartridge and cartridge control regions. All three regions can be read/write, if the cartridge supports it.

These hardware regions are decoded by the computer itself and are the only ones accessible to the cartridge port; the cartridge cannot map to any other memory regions. It does have access to the read/write line, though, and can handle writes as well as reads.

## Warning

The main computer hardware typically is tolerant of false reads as there are only two hardware registers that have side effects on reads, PORTA and PORTB on the PIA. Cartridges, on the other hand, often have banking registers in the $D500-D5FF cartridge control region that can trigger a bank switch on a read. This includes false reads from indexed addressing modes and DMA.

Care should therefore be used when accessing registers in the CCTL or PBI ranges using abs,X, abs,Y, (zp,X), and (zp),Y addressing modes. For instance, using LDA $D5FF,X with X=$08 to access a PBI register at $D607 can trip a cartridge bank switch due to a false read from $D507.

Similarly, display lists should be managed properly to avoid accidentally having ANTIC DMA from the cartridge bank registers. Overwriting an active display list with $D5 bytes, for instance, can cause playfield DMA to read from $D5D5 and crash the program by switching cartridge banks.

## Power-on and reset behavior

Cartridges may or may not have a known state on a cold start, depending on whether they have circuitry to ensure a reset on power-up. Those that don't and have hardware registers essentially power up in indeterminate state and must be programmed accordingly. For instance, a banked cartridge without reset circuitry can powerup in any bank, so all banks must contain startup code to jump to the proper startup bank.

The cartridge port does not have the computer reset signal exposed, and so cartridges are not normally able to detect a warm reset by the System Reset button. Therefore, even cartridges that have power-up reset circuitry may not be able to reset themselves on a warm reset or a software cold reset and still need startup code in all banks. It is theoretically possible to do this based on detecting when header addresses are read from the cartridge, but doing so is not common. More typically, a hardware button is included to allow the user to manually

reset the cartridge.

## Late hardware reset

Some cartridges can also experience hardware delays in power-on reset. When these delays are long enough, they can cause the cartridge to change behavior after the 6502 has already begun executing the OS cold start initialization code. One symptom that this can cause is a cartridge that fails to reliably run a software image configured as a diagnostic cartridge to the OS, which is checked very early in OS boot, but works when there is enough delay between power-on and the cartridge boot attempt. This can include configuring the cartridge software as a non-diagnostic cartridge to the OS, on a software cold reset.

## Warning

An Ultimate1MB-equipped system can fail to exhibit this issue due to the additional delays caused by the Ultimate1MB's BIOS code, which executes before the regular OS. This additional delay then gives the cartridge hardware enough time to fully reset, hiding the issue.

