## 8.10 The Multiplexer

The Multiplexer, stylized in some documentation as The MULTIPLEXER! or MUX, was a cartridge-based device from Computer Software Services (CSS) that supported networking between computers to share storage devices. Custom software on both the host and client devices routes SIO requests and responses onto the bus to allow client devices to share SIO devices on the host.

The Multiplexer was originally created by Robert Puff of CSS. Decades later, the remaining assets were obtained by Stephen J. Carden, who assembled a new run of Multiplexer cartridges and supported them from his Integrated Logic Systems website at realdos.net, with the v3.6 of the MASTER.COM host software being included in the RealDos distribution. After Carden's death, the Multiplexer assets were passed to Ken Ames, who provided valuable information in determining the details below.

## Network connection

A 34-pin ribbon cable connects the Multiplexer devices together, similarly to the 34-pin cable used on PC floppy

disk drives (but without any twist). This provides a shared, 8-bit parallel half-duplex data bus between the devices, along with control lines for handshaking.

Each Multiplexer cartridge is configured as either the host or a client. Each client on the bus is assigned a unique ID from 0-7 via switches on the cartridge. The host does not have an ID.

Handshaking control signals are crossed between the host and clients, so the host can communicate with clients and vice versa, but clients cannot talk to each other. Technically they can send data to each other as there is only a single shared data bus instead of separate data in/out signals as on the SIO bus, but it would have to be done without the handshaking signals.

## CPU interface

A 6522 Versatile Interface Adapter (VIA) provides sole CPU interface of the Multiplexer. It is mapped into the cartridge control space at $D570-D57F, with other CCTL addresses ignored for compatibility with SpartaDOS X and its pass-through cartridge stack.

The Multiplexer has a pass-through cartridge port, allowing another cartridge to be inserted into it to create a cartridge stack. Most signals are connected straight through, but /CCTL is one that is notably not; the decoding logic on the cartridge blocks it from being asserted on the pass-through port when the Multiplexer's registers at $D570-D57F are accessed.

Table 28 lists the VIA signal connections in the Multiplexer hardware.

| Port   | Signal   | Direction   | Usage                         | Polarity                                                           |
|--------|----------|-------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Port A | PA7      | Both        | Network bus                   | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Port A | PA6      | Both        | Network bus                   | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Port A | PA5      | Both        | Network bus                   | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Port A | PA4      | Both        | Network bus                   | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Port A | PA3      | Both        | Network bus                   | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Port A | PA2      | Both        | Network bus                   | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Port A | PA1      | Both        | Network bus                   | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Port A | PA0      | Both        | Network bus                   | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Port B | PB7      | Input       | Handshake input               | 1 = byte ready/read                                                |
| Port B | PB6      | Input       | Selection input               | 1 = command active (on client) 1 = client answering poll (on host) |
| Port B | PB5      | Output      | Selection output              | 0 = answer poll (on client) 0 = processing command (on host)       |
| Port B | PB4      | Output      | Network control output enable | 0 = enable                                                         |
| Port B | PB3      | Output      | Network data driver direction | 0 = output                                                         |
| Port B | PB2      | Input       | Device ID bit 2               | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Port B | PB1      | Input       | Device ID bit 1               | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Port B | PB0      | Input       | Device ID bit 0               | Non-inverted                                                       |
| Misc   | CA1      | Input       | Handshake input               | 1 = byte ready/read                                                |
| Misc   | CA2      | Output      | Handshake output              | 0 = byte ready/read                                                |
| Misc   | CB1      | Input       | Not used                      |                                                                    |

Table 28: Multiplexer VIA connections

| Port   | Signal   | Direction   | Usage    | Polarity   |
|--------|----------|-------------|----------|------------|
|        | CB2      | Output      | Not used |            |

## Device selection

The Multiplexer software uses a purely host polling driven protocol, where the host continually polls all 8 client addresses for pending commands. This is controlled through several signals connected to port B: PB0-PB2 allow the client software to read the configured device ID, PB5 is an output signal with PB4 as the output enable, and PB6 is the input signal. PB5/PB6 are crossed and inverted between the host and the clients.

Clients are numbered 1-8 in the documentation and software, configured as binary 0-7 in the jumper block lines connected to PB0-PB2. These also correspond to bits 0-7 on the network data bus during selection phase. To poll, the host sets one bit at a time on the shared data bus to poll each client. If a client wants to issue a command and detects its device ID on the bus, it lowers PB4 and PB5 to enable and assert its control output. This is reflected by PB6 going high on the host, which then acknowledges this by also lowering PB4 and PB5 to assert its own control output. The client then raises its PB5 and begins sending its command.

The host keeps its PB5 asserted low during the entire command, which tells both the active client that it can proceed and keeps other clients off the bus. If the host terminates the command for any reason, it raises PB5, causing PB6 to lower on the clients. This causes the active client to cancel out of its command processing and all clients to resume monitoring for selection polling.

The drive directions of the PB5 and PB6 signals are fixed due to being routed through unidirectional drivers between the network cable and the VIA. The PB5 output is only driven onto the bus when enabled through PB4. The PB6 input is always active, however.

## Data transfer

Data is transferred over the bus a byte at a time through VIA port A. There is a bus driver between port A and the ribbon cable, with its direction being controlled by PB3, 0 for output and 1 for input. Both the driver and port A must be configured together to both input or both output for successful data transfer.

The VIA's handshaking capabilities are also used to clock the bytes through a pair of signals, ensuring that the sender has written a byte before the receiver reads it, and then confirming that before the sender writes the next byte. This allows the Multiplexer to transfer data as fast as possible over the shared bus with low software overhead while also being robust against variable delays, particularly from ANTIC DMA. The protocol is SCSIlike, involving four control signal transitions: +ready, +ack, -ready, and -ack. The 6502 must poll for readiness before it can transfer each byte, but only one poll is required per byte due to the hardware assisted handshaking.

The VIA configuration is similar on both the sending and receiving sides, pairing either CA1/CA2 or CB1/CB2 together; the Multiplexer uses CA1 and CA2. PB4 is used to enable control signal outputs on both the sending and receiving sides, including the CA1 signal and also the selection output driven by PB5.

Handshaking mode uses the two signals as follows:

- Reading or writing port A lowers CA1.
- A transition on CA2 with the selected polarity - the 'active transition' in the 6522 documentation - raises CA1. The Multiplexer configures CA1 for a rising (low to high) transition.

The signals are cross connected and inverted between the host and clients on the Multiplexer, so that lowering CA2 on one side raises CA1 on the other. The order of events is also reversed between the sending side and receiving side, so that the flow of events for each byte is as follows:

- Sending software writes a byte to port A. This causes the sender's VIA to lower the sender's CA2, thus raising the receiver's CA1.
- The receiver's VIA then raises its CA2 when its CA1 rises.
- When the receiving software notices the rising edge on CA1, it reads the byte from port A. This lowers the receiver's CA2 and raises the sender's CA1.
- The sender's VIA then raises its CA2 when its CA1 rises.
- When the sending software notices the rising edge on CA1, it proceeds to either send the next byte or to the next stage of the protocol.

A limitation of the VIA is that it only supports detecting transitions of a specified polarity on the CA1 and CB1 lines, not reading the current polarity. The Multiplexer works around this by also connecting the CA1 signal to PB7. The software uses this when receiving so it can detect CA1 going low even if it has happened before the software set up the CA1 detection mode. This isn't necessary on the sending side since its CA1 transition only happens after the first byte has been sent, so it polls the CA1 interrupt bit instead.

