## 8.2 Atarimax flash cartridges

## MaxFlash 1Mbit cartridge

The MaxFlash 1Mbit cartridge maps one megabit (128KB) of flash memory, 8KB at a time, through $A000-BFFF. Bank switching is performed by either read or write accesses to $D500-D51F, where address bits 0-3 control the bank and bit 4 disables the cartridge when set. Written data is ignored.

The flash ROM can be programmed in-place from the computer through standard flash ROM unlock and programming sequences.

Flash types seen in the wild:

- AMD Am29F010 ($01/$20)
- Micron M29F010B ($20/$20)
- Microchip SST39SF010 ($BF/$B5)

## MaxFlash 8Mbit cartridge

The MaxFlash 8Mbit cartridge maps eight megabits (1MB) of flash memory, 8KB at a time, through $A000-BFFF.

Bank switching is performed by either read or write accesses to $D500-D5FF, where address bits 0-6 control the bank and bit 7 disables the cartridge when set. Written data is ignored.

Two 4Mbit flash chips are present in this cartridge. Like the 1Mbit cartridge, the 8Mbit cartridge can also be programmed in-place.

Flash types seen in the wild:

- AMD Am29F040B ($01/$A4)
- Bright BM29F040 ($AD/$40)
- Microchip SST39SF040 ($BF/$B7)

## MaxFlash 1Mbit + MyIDE cartridge

The MaxFlash 1Mbit + MyIDE cartridge is similar to the 1Mbit cartridge, except with the banking address range moved and a MyIDE interface added. Banking is controlled by a read or write access to $D520-D53F instead of $D500-D51F.

The MyIDE interface maps the CompactFlash ATA registers at $D500-D507. Only the lower 8 bits of the data bus are exposed, so the CF device must be driven in 8-bit transfer mode.

