## 8.3 Atarimax MyIDE-II

The Atarimax MyIDE-II cartridge is an advanced cartridge that contains 512KB of flash ROM, 512KB of RAM, and a CompactFlash interface.

For official programming information, consult the MyIDE-II Programming Information document on the Atarimax website: [MyIDE-II]

## CompactFlash interface

The ATA-compatible registers of the CompactFlash interface are exposed by the MyIDE-II at $D500-D507. Only an 8-bit interface is provided. However, the alternate register set is also exposed, allowing access to the software reset facility of the CF device.

It is also possible to control power to the CF device, as well as sense when the CF device is changed. A green LED lights up whenever the CF device is powered.

## Banking mechanism

Two independently controllable access windows are provided at $8000-9FFF and $A000-BFFF. The $A000BFFF left cartridge bank is controlled by $D508 and the $8000-9FFF right-cartridge window by $D50A. Both registers are write-only. Bits 0-5 of the value written select an 8K bank, with bits 6-7 being ignored.

Unusually, the MyIDE-II also provides a third 'keyhole' window at $D580-D5FF. It is mapped in 128 byte banks, selected by a pair of banking registers at $D50C (low byte) and $D50D (high byte).

An additional write-only control register at $D50F controls the mode for each of the banking windows.

## Valid address ranges

The CF/IDE address range at $D500-D507 is only driven on read if the CompactFlash device is powered and active. If it is unpowered or held in reset state, this range will be undriven.

$D508-D50F return status information in bits 5-7, but bits 0-4 are undriven.

$D510-D57F is undriven.

$D580-D5FF is undriven if the keyhole window is disabled.

## Registers

## $D500-D507 CompactFlash control register window (read/write)

Exposes the main ATA control register set, or if bit 0 of $D50E is cleared, the alternate control register set.

## $D508-D50F CompactFlash device status (read only)

| CFP   | CFR                               | CFP                               | Undriven                          |
|-------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| D7    | CompactFlash device present sense | CompactFlash device present sense | CompactFlash device present sense |
| D6    | CompactFlash reset state          | CompactFlash reset state          | CompactFlash reset state          |
| D5    | CompactFlash power state          | CompactFlash power state          | CompactFlash power state          |
|       | 0                                 | Unpowered                         |                                   |
|       | 1                                 | Powered                           |                                   |

Indicates whether a CompactFlash device is present and whether it is powered or in reset state. This reflects the physical state of the device interface, not bits 0 and 1 of $D50E. When no CF card is present, the interface is automatically powered down and bits 5-7 read 0.

The canonical address for this register is $D50E.

Note that bits 0-4 of the data bus are not driven when reading this address.

## $D508 Left cartridge window banking register (write only)

<!-- image -->

| Ignored   | Bank   |
|-----------|--------|

## D5:D0 Left cartridge bank

Selects an 8K region for the left cartridge window out of 512K, from the memory type selected for the left cartridge window.

## $D50A Right cartridge window banking register (write only)

| Ignored   | Bank   |
|-----------|--------|

## D5:D0 Right cartridge bank

Selects an 8K region for the right cartridge window out of 512K, from the memory type selected for the right cartridge window.

## $D50C Keyhole window low banking register (write only)

<!-- image -->

Controls bits 7-0 of the keyhole window bank, in 128 byte half-pages.

## $D50D Keyhole window high banking register (write only)

| Ignored   | Keyhole bank, bits 11-8   |
|-----------|---------------------------|

Controls bits 11-8 of the keyhole window bank, in 128 byte half-pages.

## $D50E CompactFlash control register (write only)

| Ignored   | CFP   | CFA   |
|-----------|-------|-------|

- D1 CompactFlash power control

0 Disable power and assert /RESET

1 Enable power

- D0 CompactFlash reset control / alternate register select

0 Select alternate register set

1 Select main register set and deassert /RESET

Controls power to the CF device and which ATA/CF register set is active. Bits 0 and 1 also control the /RESET line to the CF device; it is automatically asserted when the device is powered on and deasserted when selecting the main register set.

A rising edge on bit 1 is required to power up the device. This is significant if bit 1 is set when a CF card is removed and then reinserted. If bit 1 is already set when this happens, writing $02 again will neither power on the device nor light up the green power LED; it is necessary to clear and then set bit 1 again.

Similarly, a rising edge on bit 0 is necessary to bring the device out of reset once it has been powered, and if bit 0 is already set it must be reset first. The CF device cannot be both powered on and brought out of reset in the same write. This means that the normal sequence to initialize the device is $00 > $02 > $03. An attempt to write $00 and then $03 will result in the device being powered on but still held in reset state, and further writes of $03 will have no effect since a rising edge on bit 0 is required, i.e. $00 > $03 > $02 > $03 would be needed.

Once the device has been powered up and brought out of reset, toggling bit 0 switches between the main and alternate register sets. Bit 1 must be kept high to keep the device powered.

Power and reset states cannot be modified when no CompactFlash card is present, and the CF interface is always reported as powered down and in reset state in this case. However, bits 0 and 1 can still be written and their state is still tracked, which is why it is necessary to write $00 before attempting to power up the CF device.

## $D50F Memory window control register (write only)

| Left CTL   | Right CTL   | Ignored   | Keyhole   |
|------------|-------------|-----------|-----------|

D7:D6 Left cartridge window mode D5:D4 Right cartridge window mode

00

Flash ROM

01 RAM, read/write

10 RAM, read-only

11

Disabled

## D1:D0 Keyhole window mode

00

RAM, read/write

01 RAM, read-only

10 Flash ROM

11 Disabled

Note that the selection modes are encoded differently for the keyhole window than for the cartridge windows.

## $D580-D5FF Keyhole window (read/write)

Accesses a 128-byte window of flash or on-board memory. If the keyhole window is disabled, reads from this

region are not handled by the cartridge and return undriven bus data.

