## 8.5 SIDE 1 / SIDE 2

SIDE 1 is a cartridge with 512KB of flash memory and a CompactFlash interface. SIDE 2 revises the design with additional support for reading back banking register values, sensing CF removal, and signaling via an LED. The two versions are similar but not completely compatible.

## Flash ROM

The flash ROM on the SIDE is used to emulate a pair of stacked cartridges, a pass-through SpartaDOS X (SDX) cartridge with a second ('top') cartridge inserted above it. Both are independently bank switched through separate banking registers.

A physical switch on the cartridge enables or disables the SDX half, regardless of the SDX banking state.

The 4Mbit flash on the SIDE can be programmed in-place on the computer using standard flash ROM unlock and programming sequences.

## CompactFlash interface

SIDE also includes a CompactFlash interface. The eight main parallel ATA compatible registers are exposed, as well as the CF reset signal.

Only the lower 8 bits of the CF data bus are exposed, so the CF device must be driven in 8-bit transfer mode.

## Real-time clock

The RTC chip in the SIDE is a Maxim DS1305, which combines a real-time clock with battery backup and a 96 byte NVRAM. The DS1305 is accessed over an SPI bus through several control bits.

## Register map

SIDE occupies a sparse set of addresses in the $D5E0-D5FF range. Table 25 shows the register layout. Grayed out entries indicate locations not handled by SIDE and ignored for reads or writes.

Table 25: SIDE 1/2 register map

<!-- image -->

|           | SIDE 1       | SIDE 1       | SIDE 2       | SIDE 2       |
|-----------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| Address   | Read         | Write        | Read         | Write        |
| D5E0      |              | SDX bank     |              |              |
| D5E1      |              |              | SDX bank     | SDX bank     |
| D5E2      | SPI sense    | SPI control  | SPI sense    | SPI control  |
| D5E4      |              | Cart bank    | Cart bank    | Cart bank    |
| D5F0 D5F7 | CF registers | CF registers | CF registers | CF registers |
| D5F8      |              | CF reset     | Signature    | CF reset     |
| D5F9      |              |              | Chg. sense   | Chg. reset   |
| D5FB      |              |              |              |              |
| D5FC D5FF | Signature    |              | Signature    |              |

## SIDE 1 Registers

## $D5E0 SDX banking register (SIDE 1 only, write only)

Controls banking for the SDX half of the cartridge.

Bits 0-5 select an 8K bank, while bit 7 disables the SDX half if set.

Bit 6 controls the top half of the cartridge, which is enabled if it is 0 and disabled if it is 1.

This register is set to $00 on power-up, enabling the SDX half and enabling the top cartridge. Pressing the menu button also does this.

## $D5E2 SPI bus sense (read only)

Bit 3 reflects the state of the SPI bus input line from the RTC chip. Currently bits 0-2 and 4-7 are reserved, but are currently driven as 0 by the SIDE hardware and thus the register always reads as $00 or $08.

## $D5E2 SPI bus control (write only)

Controls the three outgoing lines on the SPI bus to the RTC chip.

Bit 0 controls the chip enable and must be set to enable communication with the RTC chip.

Bit 1 controls the SPI clock.

Bit 2 controls the SPI outgoing data line.

## $D5E4 Cartridge banking register (write only)

Controls banking for the top cartridge half.

Bits 0-5 select an 8K bank. The interpretation of bit 5 is inverted from the SDX half, so the halves of the flash ROM are flipped between the top half and the SDX half.

Bit 7 disables the top half if set. If cleared, the top half cartridge is enabled only if the pass through from the SDX half is also enabled via bit 6 of the SDX banking register.

This register is reset to $00 on startup, enabling the top half cartridge at bank 32.

## $D5F0-D5F7 CompactFlash hardware registers (read/write)

Parallel ATA register set, as exposed by the CompactFlash device.

## $D5F8-D5FB CompactFlash reset register (write only)

Bit 0 controls the reset signal to the CompactFlash device, where 0 resets the CF card, and 1 enables normal operation.

## $D5FC-D5FF Signature bytes

These four locations hold the string 'SIDE' ($53 49 44 45) if the SDX half is enabled by hardware switch and ' IDE' ($20 49 44 45) if it is not.

## SIDE 2 Register Differences

## $D5E1 SDX banking register (SIDE 2 only, read only)

This is the same as the SDX banking register in SIDE 1, except moved from $D5E0 to $D5E1 and made readable.

## $D5E4 Top cartridge banking register (SIDE 2 only, read/write)

This register is read/write in SIDE 2, versus read-only in SIDE 1.

Also new to SIDE 2 is bit 6, which enables 16K banking if set. In that case, the top cartridge is mapped to $8000BFFF in 16K banks instead of $A000-BFFF in 8K banks. Bit 0 of the bank number is ignored in 16K mode,

although it is still stored and readable. Also, bit 7 only controls $A000-BFFF, and it is possible for that window to be disabled while $8000-9FFF is still enabled through bit 6.

## $D5F8 SIDE version detect (SIDE 2 only, read only)

Reads $32 to indicate a SIDE 2.

## Warning

SIDE 1 does not respond to $D5F8 and reading that address will return bus data on systems with a floating data bus. This value can come from data read by ANTIC DMA, and therefore can read as $32 on a SIDE 1. This means that simply reading $D5F8 and comparing it to $32 can falsely detect a SIDE 1 as SIDE 2.

One way to avoid this is ensuring that the floating bus data is a value other than $32. This can be done by preventing a DMA cycle prior to the read, thus making it likely that the last instruction byte will be returned instead ($D5), a value sufficiently different from $32. This can be ensured by reading in horizontal blank with interrupts or DMA off.

## $D5F8 CompactFlash control register (SIDE 2 only, write only)

Controls /RESET on CompactFlash card via bit 0, same as $D5F8 on SIDE 1. The difference is that SIDE 2 only responds to $D5F8 for this and not $D5F8-D5FB as on SIDE 1.

Additionally, SIDE 2 also has a new CF select bit in bit 7. If bit 7 is cleared, the CF card is selected and responds to reads and writes. However, if it is set, then the CF card is deselected and the $D5F0-D5F7 registers are disabled. When disabled, the SIDE 2 cartridge does not respond to reads or writes to those addresses, and reads from that range will return open/floating bus data.

## $D5F9 CompactFlash change status (SIDE 2 only, read only)

Bit 0 reads 0 when no change has been detected, and 1 when the CompactFlash card has been removed since the last time the change latch was reset. This latch stays set to 1, even after another CF card is inserted, until reset by a write to $D5F9.

## $D5F9 CompactFlash change control/strobe (SIDE 2 only, write only)

Resets the CF change latch when written, if a CF card is inserted. If no CF card is inserted, the CF change latch cannot be reset.

Bit 1 controls the status LED, which is normally turned on when bit 1 is cleared and turned off when it is set. The LED state is then inverted when the CF device is removed and the latch is set. The LED state is therefore determined by the XOR of the status LED bit and the change state.

