## 8.9 Veronica

The Veronica cartridge adds a 65C816 coprocessor with 128K of RAM to the computer. 41

## Programming model

The 65C816 CPU runs in a dedicated memory address space, communicating with the 6502 solely by a semaphore bit and a 16K shared memory window. The 65C816 uses only 16-bit addressing with the bank address ignored, so it effectively runs as a 65C802; clock speed is 14MHz, 8x that of the main computer. The 6502 can reset the 65C816 at any time, but there is no support for interrupts.

Because of this design, the 65C816 cannot run programs directly on the computer; it is dependent upon the 6502 for bootstrap and for communication with main memory and hardware, including all of the custom chips (ANTIC, GTIA, PIA, and POKEY). However, there is no DMA contention either, so the 65C816 always runs at full speed.

There is no persistent storage on Veronica, and the cartridge powers up with both memory windows disabled. Therefore, bootstrap must occur from an external source, like disk.

## Memory layout

64K of the memory is reserved exclusively for the 65816, of which nearly all is mapped directly, except for 16 inaccessible bytes shadowed by the hardware registers at $0200-020F in the 65C816's address space. The remaining 64K of memory is shared between the 65C816 and 6502 for communications purposes. It is split into two banks of 32K, of which the 65C816 sees one and the 6502 sees the other, and which can be swapped between them. In addition, each 32K bank is split into 16K halves, where both the 6502 and 65C816 can independently choose whether to access the bottom or top half.

On the 65C816 side, the 16K shared memory window can be placed at either $4000-7FFF or $C000-FFFF. The window is always enabled at one of the two possible locations. The location of the window and which 16K half of the 32K bank is selected are controlled by the hardware register at $0200-020F.

The 6502 can similarly map a 16K half of its 32K bank to the cartridge windows at $8000-9FFF and $A000BFFF. One 16K half is selected at a time and each window is mapped to a fixed 8K section of it, but the two 8K windows can be independently enabled or disabled. Bank, half, and window selection are controlled by a hardware register at $D5C0.

[41] The author would like to thank the Veronica team for permission and assistance in publishing technical information about the Veronica cartridge.

Figure 17: Veronica memory layout

<!-- image -->

A significant aspect of this design is that the 65C816 and 6502 never see the same memory at the same time. Both can access all of the memory, but each 32K bank is always exclusively accessed by one side and the two halves can only be swapped. Furthermore, while 16K halves can be independently chosen on each side, the 32K bank swap can only be triggered by the 6502.

## Semaphore signaling

In addition to the shared memory windows, Veronica also contains a single shared semaphore bit between the two CPUs, exposed as the high bit (bit 7) of the respective hardware control registers. A change to the semaphore bit on one side is immediately reflected on the other side.

## Warning

The multiprocessor environment created by Veronica poses some unique challenges for synchronization and requires special care when writing communications code between the CPUs. In particular, readmodify-write instructions like INC/DEC that would ordinarily be safe with interrupts on the 6502 are not safe when communicating between the 6502 and the 65816, because one CPU can swap memory banks or read the semaphore in the middle of an instruction being executed by the other. The 6502 does not support atomic memory primitives at all and the 65C816 on Veronica is not hooked up for doing so, so communications protocols must be written with this in mind.

## Hardware registers

## $0200-020F Veronica control register (65C816 side; read/write)

<!-- image -->

```
7 0 SEM WIN HLF Reserved D7 Shared semaphore 0 (default) D6 Window address 0 $C000-FFFF (default) 1 $4000-7FFF D5 Bank half select 0 Use 16K half A of 32K bank 1 Use 16K half B of 32K bank (default)
```

## D0-D4 Reserved (reads as 1)

The 65C816 controls its portion of the Veronica hardware by a single register, mirrored at $0200-020F. This register exposes the shared semaphore bit as well as banking window selection and bank half selection. Its value is reset to $3F on power-up or soft reset.

## $D5C0 Host control register (6502 side; read/write)

<!-- image -->

```
D7 Shared semaphore 1 (default) D6 Reserved (reads as 1) D5 $A000-BFFF window enable 0 Disable $A000-BFFF window (default) 1 Enable $A000-BFFF window D4 $8000-9FFF window enable 0 Disable $8000-9FFF window (default) 1 Enable $8000-9FFF window D3 Bank half select 0 Use 16K half A of 32K bank 1 Use 16K half B of 32K bank (default)
```

```
D2 Reserved (reads as 1) D1 Bank swapping 0 6502 uses bank A, 65816 uses bank B (default) 1 6502 uses bank B, 65816 uses bank A D0 Soft reset 0 Disable 65816  - hold in reset state (default) 1 Enable 65816
```

On the host side, Veronica is controlled via this single register at $D5C0. Three of the bits affect the 65C816 - bit 0 (reset), bit 1 (swap banks), and bit 7 (semaphore); the remainder control memory mapping on the 6502 side. At power-up this register is set to $CC.

By default, Veronica powers up with the 65C816 held in reset. This also resets the memory configuration on the 65C816 side so that the memory window is at $C000-FFFF and viewing the upper 16K half of the memory bank. The 6502 must upload bootstrap code into its window $A000-BFFF and then swap memory banks before or while turning off soft reset, so that the 65C816 can begin executing the bootstrap code at $E000-FFFF in its memory space through the reset vector at ($FFFC).

## Caution

The semaphore bit is inverted between the 6502 and the 65816. A 0 on the 6502 side is reflected as a 1 on the 65816 side, and vice versa.

## Hardware versions

There are two versions of the Veronica hardware. Version 1 use a three RAM chip design, where one chip supplies the main 64K of memory while the other two chips have the 32K swappable bank memory, and runs the 65C816 asynchronously to the main computer clock. Version 2 uses a single multiplexed 128K RAM and runs the 65C816 synchronously at 8x the main clock.

Both versions of the hardware have the same hardware registers and programming model. However, there is one significant difference. The V1 hardware swaps window banks without synchronization with the 65C816 side, meaning that a memory access to the banking window in progress during the swap can be corrupted. This means that reliable operation on V1 hardware requires excluding the 65C816 from the banking window whenever the 6502 swaps banks. V2 hardware does not have this limitation since it runs the 65C816 and swaps banks synchronously.

