## 7.10 XEP80 Interface Module

The XEP80 Interface Module is a device that plugs into joystick port 1 or 2 and provides a separate 80-column, monochrome text display. It also has limited graphics capability.

## Communication protocol

Data is transferred to and from the XEP80 via a serial protocol at a baud rate of 15.625KHz. This is designed to be close to the horizontal scan rate of 15.7KHz on the host computer. Communication from the host to the XEP80 is by means of the joystick up line (bit 0 or 4 of PORTA/B) and communication from the XEP80 to the host is via the joystick down line (bit 1 or 5 of PORTA/B).

The data format is one start bit, followed by nine data bits starting with the LSB, and ending with one stop bit. Bytes sent with bit 8=0 are characters to print, while bytes sent with bit 8=1 are commands.

When sending data back to the host, the XEP80 actually uses two stop bits, giving the host one bit cell of time between the bytes.

## Cursor updates

Whenever a character is read or written, the XEP80 sends back update bytes to tell the computer that the operation has completed and the new location of the cursor. All cursor update bytes have bit 8 set. The cursor update consists of one to three bytes of the following types:

- $100-150: New horizontal position, with no following vertical position byte.
- $180-1D0: New horizontal position, to be followed by a new vertical position byte.
- $1E0-1FF: New vertical position.

The horizontal position update only indicates positions 0-80, with 80 being returned for any positions to the right of that. A horizontal position query command must be issued to retrieve the true horizontal position beyond column 80.

If the cursor doesn't change, such as if an escape sequence is started ($1B), a dummy horizontal update is sent.

## Burst mode

The XEP80 can be placed into a burst mode where cursor updates are suppressed for faster text output. Instead, the XEP80 simply pulls its output low while it is busy and raises it when it is done. This avoids the delay of waiting for the cursor update bytes, at the cost of the computer needing to manually query the cursor position

when needed.

There is a short delay between when the XEP80 receives a character and when it can assert the busy output. As a result, the host must wait 90µs before checking busy state. 37 This is about 160 machine cycles.

Burst mode is automatically activated in pixel graphics or printer mode.

## Left and right margins

During put or get character operations, the cursor is constrained to be within the left and right margins, inclusively. Whenever the cursor advances beyond the right margin, it is moved to the left margin on the next line. By default, the left and right margins are set to columns 0 and 79.

Note that while the cursor is restricted to within the margins, vertical scroll operations always move entire rows including text outside of the margins. Line clear operations, on the other hand, clear 80 columns starting at the scroll position.

## Logical lines

The first 24 lines of the screen are organized as a series of logical lines, where each logical line contains one or more contiguous physical lines. Physical lines are grouped into a logical line when characters are printed past the right margin at the end of a logical line.

There are two differences between the logical line handling in the XL/XE OS's screen editor and the XEP80. First, the OS screen editor allows logical lines to contain a maximum of three physical lines (120 characters), while there is no limit in the XEP80 and the entire screen can be one big logical line. Second, instead of using an external bitfield to track logical line boundaries, the XEP80 tracks logical line groupings by means of EOLs in the frame buffer. The end of a logical line is marked by an EOL at the right margin column.

## End of line anomaly

Because of the use of EOLs in the frame buffer to track logical lines, the XEP80 can track spaces at the end of a logical line, unlike the standard E: driver. Compounding this issue is that the standard XEP80 E: handler will return these spaces and the XEP80 firmware will replace EOLs with spaces when moving the cursor for the move right ($1F), backspace ($7A), and tab ($7F) special characters. This can result in unwanted effects like splicing a large number of spaces at the end of a DATA statement in a BASIC program. EOLs cannot be reinserted into a logical line, so this can only be fixed by deleting spaces and shortening the line.

## Status row

The 25 th row (row 24) is special as it is the status row, for which much functionality is disabled. When the cursor is in the status row, only the escape and clear special characters are processed and all other characters are printed. Advancing past the right margin wraps back to the left margin within the status row. 38

## Video timing

The XEP80 is notorious for extreme amounts of overscan in text mode that can make the outer portions of the display invisible to the user. The primary reason for this is the use of a 10 row character cell with 25 character rows, giving 250 active display scan lines out of 262 total in a non-interlaced NTSC display. This exceeds the 243 scan lines per field normally used for a fully overscanned display and far exceeds the approximately 192

[37] [ATA87] p.11

[38] [ATA87] p.5 has a warning about a lockup if the cursor is moved to the status row while BASIC is at its READY prompt. This is an issue with the handler software - it tries to read characters until it finds an EOL, and due to the special behavior in the status row, it can end up looping infinitely.

scan line region typically considered title-safe, making the top and bottom rows of the screen hard to see on regularly adjusted displays. The situation is not much better in PAL, where the character cell height is increased to 12 rows, giving 300 active scan lines.

Another issue with the XEP80's video output is that it is significantly out of spec. The horizontal scan rate is 16.3KHz in 60Hz text mode and 16.1KHz in 60Hz graphics mode. The number of scan lines is also off, with the XEP80 producing 272 scan lines in 60Hz text, 269 scan lines in 60Hz graphics, 327 scan lines in 50Hz text, 323 scan lines in 50Hz graphics. The vertical scan rate is generally much better, but the poor horizontal scan rate and incorrect scan line count prevent some modern TVs from locking onto the XEP80's display and will show a vertically rolling picture. It is possible to reprogram the XEP80 for closer 60Hz timings at least by use of undocumented commands (50Hz timings are more awkward given the NS405's limitations).

## Video memory layout

8KB of video memory is present in the XEP80 for text, graphics, and auxiliary data. In text mode, this is organized as 25 rows of 256 bytes each for easy addressing, from $0000-19FF. This allows for horizontally scrolling the 80x25 display window over a 256x25 virtual text screen. While each row is contiguous, the XEP80 will display them out of order as scrolling is performed by swapping display row pointers rather than moving data in memory.

In addition to the text display, video memory is also used for tracking tab stops and queued print data. Memory at $1A00-1AFF contains flags for tab stops at each column, and $1B00-1FFF is used for the print buffer.

## Internal memory layout

64 bytes of internal memory are also contained within the NS405 processor and contain working registers, the stack, and variables. These bytes are normally managed for internal use by the XEP80, but may be written using command $E5.

Of the internal memory locations, the most interesting are addresses $20-38, which contain the high byte of the starting address for each display row. Bits 0-4 are used for memory addressing, while bit 5 selects one of the two ATASCII character sets in the external character ROM and bit 6 bypasses the external character ROM entirely for pixel graphics or the internal character set. The row pointers are only reinitialized by power-on or a master reset ($C2) command; afterward they are swapped around as needed during scroll and insert/delete operations.

## Character display attributes

Two attribute latch registers determine the display characteristics of characters on screen. Attribute latch 0 is used when character data bit 7 = 0 while attribute latch 1 is used when character data bit 7 = 1. This mostly corresponds to characters $00-7F and $80-FF, except when the ATASCII character sets are enabled in which case $9B (EOL) also uses attribute latch 0. 39 Normally both attribute latches are set to $FF, which disables all special attributes.

The attribute registers can be set by means of commands $F4 and $F5, which each set one of the attribute latches to the value of the last character written. All bits in the attribute byte have inverted behavior such that they must be set to 0 to enable the feature:

- Bit 0 (Reverse video) : Inverts the entire character cell.
- Bit 1 (Half intensity) : This bit sets characters to half-intensity. This feature is not hooked up in the

[39] This bizarre EOL anomaly is due to the way external character sets are implemented in the NS405: attribute latch selection is based on bit 7 of the data coming into the NS405, and when the ATASCII character sets are enabled this actually comes from bit 7 of the character data and not the character name. The external character ROM is set up to emit bit 7 = 0 for $00-7F and $9B and bit 7 = 1 for $80-9A and $9C-FF. When the external character ROM is bypassed, the NS405 sees the actual character names and so the split between the latches is the more normal $00-7F / $80-FF.

XEP80, so it does nothing.

- Bit 2 (Blink) : Causes the character to blink on and off by alternately blanking character data. This happens at half the cursor blink rate, normally toggling every 32 frames. If reverse video is also enabled on this character and the reverse video blink field option is set in the VCR (bit 0), the entire character cell is inverted instead.
- Bit 3 (Double height) : Stretches a character vertically to double its normal height. When active, the blanking function is disabled and bit 6 is repurposed as the character half bit, where 0 selects the lower half and 1 selects the upper half. Double height mode is only functional with the internal character set or block graphics and does not work with the ATASCII character sets.
- Bit 4 (Double width) : Stretches a character horizontally to double its normal width, covering both the current and next character cells. The next character and its attribute are ignored.
- Bit 5 (Underline) : ORs an underline into the character graphic.
- Bit 6 (Blank) : Blanks out all character data.
- Bit 7 (Block graphics) : Replaces the character from the character set with block graphics instead, based on bits 0-6 of the character. This mode only works with the internal graphics set; it produces garbage with the ATASCII character sets due to the character graphic data being converted to block graphics instead of the original character.

The order of operations for attributes is block graphics, double width + height, blank + blink, underline, reverse video blink field, reverse video, and then finally global reverse video.

## Character sets

Three character sets are available with the XEP80, two of which correspond to the standard ATASCII and international ATASCII character sets, while the third is an internal character set within the NS405. The ATASCII and international ATASCII character sets can be mixed on a line-by-line basis, although this is not normally exposed and only available by writing directly to internal memory to toggle bit 5 of character row address bytes.

The two ATASCII character sets are both 256 characters in size, with the $80-FF characters being inverted versions of $00-7F. Thus, $80-FF produce inverted character graphics even though the attribute latches are not set for reverse video. The exception is the inverted escape or EOL character $9B, which is blanked in both character sets to keep the EOLs in the framebuffer from showing up.

The internal character set contains only 128 characters and so does not show inverse video unless the attribute latches are changed. Because it does not contain the hacked-in blank for the EOL character, enabling the internal character set causes blank areas of the display to show ä instead.

## Block graphics

Clearing bit 7 of one of the attribute latches causes the corresponding half of the character set to display block graphics. This divides the character cell into a 3x3 grid with bits 0-6 of the character set lighting the sub-blocks. Since there are 9 sub-blocks and only 7 bits, bits 0 and 5 control two sub-blocks each:

Table 21: Character bit to block graphics mapping

<!-- image -->

|   0 |   1 |   0 |
|-----|-----|-----|
|   2 |   3 |   4 |
|   5 |   6 |   5 |

Block graphics normally only work properly with the internal character set. The reason is that it requires the NS405 to directly see the original character bytes, and when the ATASCII character sets are enabled those bytes are translated through the character ROM. The result is that each row of ATASCII character graphics data is interpreted as block graphics per the layout above, resulting in garbled block graphics. Enabling the internal character set disables the external character ROM and allows block graphics to work correctly. It can also be made to work with the ATASCII character sets by writing into internal memory to set bit 6 on character row address bytes to bypass the external character ROM for those rows.

## Pixel graphics

Command $99 switches the XEP80 from text mode to pixel graphics. In pixel graphics mode, all 8K of on-board memory is dedicated to a 320x200 monochrome display, similar to GRAPHICS 8. The pixel aspect ratio, however, is much narrower than a GR.8 display, as the pixels are output with a dot clock of 12MHz instead of 7.14MHz. This produces a narrower than square display on NTSC.

In graphics mode, the firmware writes normal bytes received directly to the cursor location, ignoring all normal special character processing logic. The cursor address is automatically incremented, but not wrapped within the display, so it cycles through all VRAM including non-displayed memory. Since the NS405 displays bits LSB-first instead of MSB-first as ANTIC does, the XEP80 firmware reverses the order of bits when writing bytes into display memory in graphics mode.

Internally, the graphics display is stored in on-board memory as contiguous rows at $0000-1F3F. However, the external character set ROMs must be bypassed, so the NS405 is set to address $4000-5F3F. If the display pointers are modified to within $0000-3FFF or $8000-BFFF, the display data will be translated through one of the ATASCII character generators, using a row height of 10 scan lines. However, due to the bit reversal done during writes, this requires sending the XEP80 bit reversed ATASCII so that the firmware un-reverses it to the correct values on write. Also, for some reason, the row counter is incremented after the fifth byte in each scan line instead of at the end.

The standard cursor positioning commands can be used in graphics mode, but since the text row pointers are not reinitialized by the command to enter graphics mode, vertical positioning is indeterminate unless a master reset is issued first. The standard cursor commands also only allow positioning up to $18FF. An alternative is the undocumented $E2 command, but that requires writing two bytes to the cursor address. One workaround is to modify BEGD/ENDD/HOME to warp the display around the status row location at $1800-18FF and then use the $98 command to move the cursor to the status row before issuing commands that require the last character or extra byte values.

## Pixel graphics mode oddities

The cursor is still active in pixel graphics mode, although it is only a single scan line tall. Cursor blinking is disabled when pixel graphics mode is entered, but the cursor on/off state is preserved. There is a bug in the XEP80 that corrupts the display if the Cursor On or Cursor On, Blinking commands are issued in pixel graphics mode, due to resetting VCR back to text mode values.

The attribute latches are still also valid in pixel graphics. Bit 7 of display memory, or bit 0 in data written from the computer, selects the attribute latch (1 = latch B). There is no $9B anomaly. Reverse video, blink, double width, underline, and blank attributes are active, while half intensity, double height, and graphics attributes are ignored. 40 The Set Graphics command ($99) does not reset the attribute latches, so they must be manually reset back to $FF for proper pixel graphics display if they have been previously modified, unless attribute activation is actually desired.

[40] The NS405 manual says that attribute-based reverse video is disabled in pixel graphics mode, but this appears to be untrue for the XEP80's pixel graphics configuration - resetting bit 0 of either attribute latch will invert bytes mapped to that latch, same as in text mode.

## Hardware scrolling

In text mode, the LSB of the address for each display row other than the status row is specified by command $DC. This scrolls the display horizontally without requiring copying of display data, and is thus fast and nondestructive. Similarly, the firmware uses the NS405's table lookup mode to quickly scroll vertically, since it allows doing so by swapping row address pointers.

Pixel graphics mode supports both horizontal and vertical scrolling, although doing so requires several undocumented firmware commands. The BEGD and ENDD registers can be modified to specify a wrapping region, and the HOME register to set a starting address within that region. This allows horizontal scrolling on a byte basis and vertical scrolling on a scan line basis. Although the XEP80 only has 8K of display memory, the address registers on the NS405 are full 16 bit; the display pointer will wrap around the 8K memory and cross the boundaries for the different external character set generator modes specified by A13 and A14.

Unlike text mode, where the status row is a single row, in pixel graphics mode the status row is extended to a non-scrollable region of arbitrary row height. Timing chain register 8 specifies the row on which this region begins, with a starting address specified by SROW, after which rows are displayed sequentially.

## Warning

There appears to be a bug in the NS405 with the non-scrollable region such that the display address is reset to SROW at the end of each scan line in the row specified by TC[8] instead of only at the end of the last scan line. The result is that with a character height of 10 scan lines, scan lines 1-9 of that row are repeated versions of the beginning scan line of the non-scrollable region pointed to by SROW.

## Baud rate modification

It is possible to reprogram the XEP80 to run at a different baud rate than the default 15.6 Kbaud rate by means of the undocumented $FA-FC commands, which alter the UART parameters. The most useful combinations are asymmetrical 31.5Kbaud transmit / 15.6 Kbaud receive and symmetrical 31.5K transmit/receive.

The main limitation on the usable baud rate is the slew rate of the joystick control lines, affected greatly by RLC network protection circuits on the joystick ports. PIA port A uses single-ended drivers and this results in slow 0>1 transitions; the drive capability varies by chip and some variants of the 6521 are not able to transition to 1 fast enough with regular transmit timing for the XEP80 to see a 1 bit after a 0 bit. This can be fixed with precompensation to emit 1 bits earlier to give the output enough time to rise above threshold. However, the generally slow rise time makes faster speeds like 63.5KHz impossible.

## Horizontal position and row advance anomaly

By default, the XEP80 firmware programs the NS405 to emit the leading edge of horizontal sync close to the start of horizontal blank, about 3.4 characters (2.0µs) after the last displayed character. This places the 80character display about five characters right of ideal centered position, resulting in some columns on the right being cut off on some displays. The NS405 timing chain can be reprogrammed to adjust the horizontal sync position and recenter the display. However, hardware design issues in the NS405 and XEP80 cause an artifact that prevent this from working.

The NS405 requires an external row counter when an external character set is used, since it does not output its own internal row counter. A scan line reset signal is emitted to reset this counter, and it is incremented every horizontal sync to advanced to the next row within the character cell. Normally, this happens within a couple of character cells of horizontal blank, cleanly between rows.

When horizontal sync is moved later in HBLANK, however, an artifact appears where the first few characters are displayed one character row lower than intended. The reason for this is a four-byte fetch FIFO within the NS405

that begins prefetching a few character cells after horizontal blank begins. With the default HSBR setting of $52, this occurs after the row counter has incremented, but raising HSBR results in the FIFO being able to fetch some data through the character ROM before HSYNC starts and the row counter increments. This happens when the HSBR > HBR + 3. The last affected character flickers due to one-character variance in FIFO timing.

It is possible to work around this issue raising HBR to extend the displayed area and delay the start of horizontal blank until closer to horizontal sync. The additional displayed characters are usually blank unless horizonal scrolling has been used, which is uncommon.

## Initial state

The power-on or post-reset state of the XEP80 is as follows:

- 60Hz text mode
- Attribute latches set to $FF
- List mode disabled, escape not active
- Left margin at 0, right margin at 79
- RAM cleared to EOL ($9B)
- Tabs set every 8 characters starting at the 8 th column (column 7), and also at column 2

## Special characters

## Move up ($1C)

Moves the cursor up one physical line, wrapping from row 0 to row 23.

## Move down ($1D)

Moves the cursor down one physical line, wrapping from row 23 to row 0.

## Move left ($1E)

Moves the cursor left, wrapping from the left margin to the right margin within the same physical line.

## Move right ($1F)

Moves the cursor right, wrapping from the right margin to the left margin within the same physical line. An EOL is replaced with a space if it is the character under the cursor prior to moving right.

## Backspace ($7A)

Moves left one character within the current logical line and replaces the character at the new position with a space. If the cursor is at the left margin, it will move to the right margin on the previous line if that is part of the same logical line (no EOL at right margin); otherwise, the backspace operation is ignored.

## Tab ($7F)

Advances the cursor right one character until the next tab stop is reached, replacing EOLs with spaces in positions that it leaves. This will splice logical lines together without inserting physical lines if the end of a logical

line is breached.

## Delete line ($9C)

Deletes the logical line starting at the current vertical position. For instance, if the current logical line is three lines tall, three physical lines will be deleted.

The XEP80's behavior differs from the standard E: handler when the cursor is in the middle of a logical line. The standard E: handler will delete all physical lines comprising the logical line that the cursor is in, while the XEP80 will only delete physical lines starting from the current line. When the delete line command is sent when the cursor is in second physical line of a three line tall logical line, the XEP80 will only delete the second and third physical lines. This leaves the first line behind and also splices it with the next logical line.

## Clear tab ($9E) / Set tab ($9F)

Sets or clears the current horizontal position as a tab position. Neither the framebuffer nor the cursor position are modified.

## Command set

All commands are sent with bit 8 set.

## Set Horizontal Cursor Position ($00-4F)

Moves the cursor to the specified horizontal position.

## Set Horizontal Cursor Position High Nibble ($50-5F)

Modifies the high four bits of the horizontal cursor position to $0x-Fx. The lower four bits are not modified.

## Set Left Margin ($60-6F)

Sets the left margin to positions 0-15.

## Set Left Margin High Nibble ($70-7F)

Sets the high bits of the left margin position to $0x-Fx. The lower four bits are not modified.

## Set Vertical Cursor Position ($80-97)

Moves the cursor to the specified vertical position.

## Set Cursor to Status Row ($98)

Moves the cursor to row 24, the status row.

## Set Graphics to 60Hz ($99)

Reinitializes the XEP80 in 320x200 pixel graphics mode at 60Hz refresh rate. The cursor is reset to the top-left byte in the display, cursor blinking is turned off, character blink mode is set to foreground only, and the display polarity is set to white-on-black.

This command sets HOME=$4000, BEGD=$4000, ENDD=$FFFF, and CURS=$4000.

## Modify Graphics to 50Hz ($9A)

Changes video timing parameters to display pixel graphics at 50Hz refresh. This only works properly if the XEP80 is already in graphics mode.

## Set Right Margin ($A0-AF)

Sets the right margin to positions 64-79 ($40-4F).

## Set Right Margin High Nibble ($B0-BF)

Sets the upper four bits of the right margin position to $0x-Fx. The lower four bits are not modified.

## Read Char and Advance ($C0)

Reads and returns the character under the current cursor position and then advances to the next position. This will return EOLs without translating them to spaces. The cursor wraps within the margins and either stays in the status row or advances to the next row if not in the status row. If the cursor goes beyond row 23, the screen will scroll.

A cursor update follows the read byte.

## Read Horizontal Position ($C1)

Returns the horizontal cursor position. Unlike the cursor update data, this returns the unmodified horizontal position over the full $00-FF range and is useful when the cursor update indicates $50+.

## Master Reset ($C2)

Reinitializes the XEP80, resetting everything that the power-on path does except for UART parameters. This includes the system and video control registers, the entire timing chain, and all state, as well as filling RAM with EOLs.

An $01 byte is returned on completion.

## Get Printer Port Status ($C3)

Returns $00 if the printer is busy and $01 if it is online and ready.

## Fill Memory With Previous Character ($C4)

The entire 8K of memory is filled with the last character written. This is intended to be used with pixel graphics mode since the byte is written in reversed bit order and the entire 8K is overwritten, including memory that would be used by the tab array and print buffer in text mode.

An $01 byte is returned on completion.

## Fill Memory With Space ($C5)

Fills all 8K of memory with spaces ($20). An $01 byte is returned on completion.

## Fill Memory With EOL ($C6)

Fills all 8K of memory with EOLs ($9B). An $01 byte is returned on completion.

## Read Character Without Advancing ($C7) (undocumented)

Returns the character at the current cursor position. No EOL translation occurs, the cursor is not moved, and no cursor update is sent.

## Read Timer Counter Register ($CB) (undocumented)

Reads and returns the value of the 8048 T register. This register is set to $00 for text mode and $03 for graphics mode.

## Clear List Flag ($D0)

Turns off list mode, enabling normal escape processing.

## Set List Flag ($D1)

Turns on list mode, which causes all characters except for EOL ($9B) to be escaped and printed. This is the XEP80's equivalent to the E: handler's DSPFLG.

The list flag is ignored in pixel graphics mode.

## Set Normal Transmit Mode ($D2)

Disables burst mode so that each character is followed up by a cursor update of one or more bytes. This also exits printer mode.

## Set Burst Transmit Mode ($D3)

Turns on burst mode. In burst mode, the XEP80 lowers its transmit line while busy and raises it when ready. No cursor update is sent. This also exits printer mode.

## Set ATASCII Character Set ($D4)

Changes the text display to use the standard ATASCII character set, including all text currently on screen. This is the same as the standard OS character set at $E000-E3FF except that $9B displays as blank.

## Set International Character Set ($D5)

Changes the text display to use the international ATASCII character set, including all text currently on screen. This is the same as the alternate OS character set at $CC00-CFFF except that $9B displays as blank.

## Set Internal Character Set ($D6)

Changes the text display to use the internal character set inside the NS-405.

## Modify Text Display to 50Hz ($D7)

Changes the text display to to 50Hz and taller characters for a PAL display.

## Cursor Off ($D8)

Hides the cursor.

## Cursor On ($D9)

Shows the cursor and sets it to solid mode.

## Warning

The Cursor On ($D9) and Cursor On, Blinking ($DA) commands use a shadow of the Video Control Register (VCR) that is not updated by the command to switch to pixel graphics. As a result, using either command will switch the NS405 out of pixel graphics mode back to text mode, corrupting the display. This can be fixed by rewriting the correct value into the VCR or turning the cursor on/off prior to enabling pixel graphics.

## Cursor On, Blinking ($DA)

Shows the cursor and sets it to blink mode. The cursor blinks on and off with a period of 16 frames per state.

## Move to Logical Start ($DB)

Moves the cursor vertically to the start of a logical line. A logical line is defined as a set of contiguous physical lines where all but the last physical line have a non-EOL character at the right margin.

Note that the horizontal position of the cursor is not changed by this command.

## Set Scroll Window ($DC)

Horizontally scrolls the text window so that cursor is at the left-most column on screen. The left margin is ignored, so the cursor ends up at column 0 on screen regardless of the left margin setting.

This command has no effect in pixel graphics mode.

## Set Printer Output ($DD)

Redirects character output to the printer. This automatically turns on burst transmit mode.

## Set White on Black ($DE)

Turns off reverse video mode.

## Set Black on White ($DF)

Turns on reverse video mode.

## Set Extra Byte ($E1, $E4, $E6, $EE, $F0, $F2, $F9) (undocumented)

Copies the value of the last character to the extra byte. The extra byte is used for debugging commands that require two bytes of input. This should be followed up immediately with another command to use the extra byte, as it can be overwritten by many commands as well as some text movement operations (insert/delete).

## Set Cursor Address ($E2) (undocumented)

Modifies the NS405 CURS register, which contains the cursor address, to have the high byte from the extra byte and the low byte from the extra byte. This moves the cursor on screen and also sets the next address used by cursor-driven operations.

## Write Internal Memory ($E5) (undocumented)

Writes an internal memory location using the address specified by the extra byte and the value of the last character.

## Set Display Home Address ($E7) (undocumented)

Sets the value of the NS405 HOME register. This register determines the starting address of the graphics screen at the top-left corner of the display. It is normally set to $4000 by the firmware.

In text mode, this register is regularly overwritten by interrupt at the end of each row, and so this command has no lasting effect.

## Write Video Control Register ($ED) (undocumented)

Writes the value of the last character into the video control register (VCR) of the NS405.

| D7:D6   | Display mode                        | Display mode                                                                                                            |
|---------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|         | 0X                                  | Text, internal character set                                                                                            |
|         | 10                                  | Text, external character set                                                                                            |
|         | 11                                  | Pixel graphics                                                                                                          |
| D5      | Display enable                      | Display enable                                                                                                          |
|         | 0                                   | Disable display                                                                                                         |
|         | 1                                   | Enable display                                                                                                          |
| D4      | Internal/external attribute mode    | Internal/external attribute mode                                                                                        |
|         | 0                                   | Internal attribute latches (XEP80 operating mode)                                                                       |
|         | 1                                   | External attribute memory (not supported by XEP80)                                                                      |
| D3      | Reverse video                       | Reverse video                                                                                                           |
|         | 0                                   | Reverse video display for entire screen (note that this stacks with reverse video on each character)                    |
|         | 1                                   | Normal display                                                                                                          |
| D2      | Cursor reverse video                | Cursor reverse video                                                                                                    |
|         | 0                                   | Cursor inverts character cell                                                                                           |
|         | 1                                   | Cursor overwrites character cell                                                                                        |
| D1      | Cursor blink                        | Cursor blink                                                                                                            |
|         | 0                                   | Cursor is solid                                                                                                         |
|         | 1                                   | Cursor blinks                                                                                                           |
| D0      | Reverse video blink field/character | Reverse video blink field/character                                                                                     |
|         | 0                                   | Character data blinks when reverse video is enabled in attributes (blink between inverted char and filled cell)         |
|         | 1                                   | Whole character cell blinks when reverse video is enabled in attribute (alternately invert/don't invert character cell) |

## Set Begin Display Address ($EF) (undocumented)

Sets the NS405 BEGD register, which determines the beginning address of the scrollable region in graphics mode. The display wraps back to this address after reaching the value of ENDD.

The BEGD register is not active in text mode, during which the firmware uses table lookup mode.

## Set End Display Address ($F1) (undocumented)

Sets the NS405 ENDD register, which determines the ending address of the scrollable region in graphics mode. When ENDD is reached, the display wraps to the address specified in BEGD. Note that ENDD must be one past the last byte in the ending scan line before the wrap.

The display address must exactly match ENDD at the end of a scan line to wrap back to BEGD. It is possible to wrap around from ENDD to BEGD in the middle of a row, but not in the middle of a scan line. If the display address advances past ENDD during a scan line, the display will fail to wrap and continue displaying rows sequentially past ENDD.

The ENDD register is not active in text mode, during which the firmware uses table lookup mode.

## Set Status Row Address ($F3) (undocumented)

Sets the NS405 SROW register, which determines the starting address of the status row. This is normally set to $1800, $3800, or $5800 by the firmware depending on the current character set. The vertical location of the status row is determined by timing chain register 8.

In text mode, the status row's address is determined by SROW instead of HOME, and therefore that single row is not affected by horizontal scrolling. In graphics mode, the status row defines the start of a non-scrollable vertical area that begins at the address specified by SROW and extends to the bottom of the display.

## Set Attribute Latch 0/1 ($F4 / $F5)

Sets the one of the two attribute latches used to format text characters on screen. Attribute latch 0 is used for character data with bit 7=0 while attribute latch 1 is used for character data with bit 7=1. Both attribute latches are set to $FF by default. The attribute latch is set to the value of the last character.

Note that while the attribute latches are still active with pixel graphics, they are not reset by the command to set pixel graphics mode.

While the $F4/F5 commands are not listed in the XEP80.DOC file included on the XEP80 handler disk, they are officially documented in the ATRIBUTE.BAS demo program.

## Set Timing Control Pointer ($F6) (undocumented)

Sets the Timing Control Pointer (TCP) register from the value of the last character. This register sets the index of the next register to modify in the NS405 timing control chain. Only bits 0-3 are valid.

## Set Timing Control Register ($F7) (undocumented)

Sets the register in the timing chain pointed to by the TCP to the value of the last character. Afterward, the TCP is advanced to the next register. Table 22 gives the values applied to the timing chain by the firmware for various modes.

## Warning

The NS405 documentation says to set HSBR and HSER to the character position after which horizontal sync is to begin and end, + 2. In reality, the beginning of horizontal sync occurs about 2.5 characters later than expected, while end of horizontal sync is close to expected. Thus, setting HSBR/HSER as documented results in horizontal sync starting ~2.5 characters late and 2.5 characters shorter than expected.

With character cell numbers starting at 0 for the leftmost displayed column, HSBR should be set to the character cell in which horizontal sync should start in the middle of, and HSER to the character cell at which horizontal sync should stop at the beginning of + 2. The default values of HBR=$4F, HSBR=$52, and HSER=$5F result in a horizontal sync pulse that starts 2.5 character cells after the end of the last displayed character and is 10.5 character cells long.

## Set Vertical Interrupt Register ($F8) (undocumented)

Sets the NS405 VINT register to the value of the last character. The VINT register controls the NS405 equivalent of ANTIC's DLI, such that an interrupt is fired at the end of the specified row. The XEP80 initializes VINT to the second to last row in the main region (22) and uses the vertical interrupt to reset the current row counter to the last row (23).

## Set Baud Rate ($FA) (undocumented)

Sets the NS405 PSR (prescaler) register to the value of the last character and the BAUD register to the value of the extra byte. Bits 4-7 of the PSR select the prescaling factor in half-factor increments from 3.5 to 11. Bits 0-2 of the PSR supply bits 8-10 of the divisor, while the BAUD register supplies bits 0-7. The resultant baud rate is as follows:

Table 22: XEP80 Timing Register Values

|   Register | Register                  | 60Hz Text   | 50Hz Text   | 60Hz Gfx   | 50Hz Gfx   |
|------------|---------------------------|-------------|-------------|------------|------------|
|          0 | Horizontal total          | 68          |             | 5C         |            |
|          1 | Horizontal display length | 4F          |             | 27         |            |
|          2 | Horizontal sync start     | 52          |             | 3B         |            |
|          3 | Horizontal sync end       | 5F          |             | 46         |            |
|          4 | Char height + extra scans | 91          | B2          | 98         | BA         |
|          5 | Vertical total            | 1A          |             | 19         |            |
|          6 | Vertical display height   | 18          |             | 13         | 10         |
|          7 | Vertical sync             | 02          |             | 79         |            |
|          8 | Status row                | 17          |             |            |            |
|          9 | Blink rate + duty cycle   | F4          |             |            |            |
|         10 | Block graphics horiz.     | 30          |             |            |            |
|         11 | Block graphics vert.      | 36          |             |            |            |
|         12 | Underline                 | 89          |             |            |            |
|         13 | Cursor                    | 0F          |             |            |            |

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The defaults are PSR=$90 and BAUD=$05. This sets the prescaler to ÷8 and the divisor to ÷6, for a final baud rate of 750,000 ÷ 48 = 15,625 baud.

## Set UART Control Register ($FB) (undocumented)

Sets the NS405 UCR register to the value of the last character. The UCR is constantly rewritten by the serial I/O routines in the XEP80 firmware, so this command is ineffective.

## Set UART Multiplex Register ($FC) (undocumented)

Sets the NS405 UMX register to the value of the last character. This register allows either the transmit or receive rate to be divided down from the other, giving asymmetric baud rates. Exactly one bit from bits 0-5 is set to select a divisor from ÷1 to ÷32, respectively. Bit 7 then selects the divided down rate for transmit (0) or receive (1).

On init, UMX is set to $01 to use the same baud rate for transmit and receive operations.

## Set UART Transmit Register ($FD) (undocumented)

Sets the NS405 XMTR register to the value of the last character, retransmitting that character back to the computer.

## Strobe Printer ($FF) (undocumented)

Sends the printer a strobe indicating a new byte is available, without actually setting a new byte.

