## 7.11 Corvus Disk System

The Corvus Disk System, made by Corvus Systems, was a multi-platform system for adding external hard disk storage to a computer. For the Atari 8-bit computers, the Corvus was connected to the computer through an Interface box that connected to joystick ports 3 and 4 on the 400/800.

## Joystick port usage

The standard Corvus Interface is a bidirectional, byte-wide parallel port with additional control signals. Since combining two joystick ports only gives 8 bidirectional data lines total via the joystick direction lines connected to the PIA, the Interface provides a nibble-wide data interface to the computer and adapts it to the byte-wise interface of the Corvus.

Joystick port 3 (PORTB bits 0-3) is used as the bidirectional half-duplex data path, while joystick port 4 (PORTB bits 4-7) is configured as output-only for control signals. The control signals are used to drive the Interface as follows:

Table 23: Corvus Interface modes

|   PORTB bits 4-6 | Command                                       |
|------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
|              000 | Write lower nibble                            |
|              001 | Write upper nibble and send byte to drive     |
|              010 | Receive byte from drive and read lower nibble |
|              011 | Read upper nibble                             |
|              100 | Read interface status                         |

Bit 7 is used as a strobe, with commands taking effect on the falling edge of bit 7.

## Reading interface status

Issuing the %100 command causes the Interface to place bus status onto the nibble bus, reflected as bits 0-1 of PORTB. Bit 0 indicates ready status, where 0 indicates that the device is busy and 1 indicates that it is ready to transfer data. Bit 1 indicates the direction of the bus for the current pending transfer, where 0 means computerto-host and 1 means host-to-computer.

## Command set

All communication with the disk system is initiated by the computer via commands. All commands follow the same form, with a command packet being sent from the computer, followed by a status code and return data from the device. The disk is exposed to the computer as a linear array of 512 byte blocks, which can be read or written as 128, 256, 512, or 1024 byte sectors via multiple types of read/write sector commands.

Details of the protocol and command set are too large to include here. Fortunately, Corvus Systems published complete documentation for both in Corvus Mass Storage Systems General Technical Information [CorvusGTI].

