## 7.12 ComputerEyes Video Acquisition System

The ComputerEyes Video Acquisition System by Digital Vision, Inc. is a hardware device for capturing still video frames from a composite video signal. It connects to the computer through joystick ports 1 and 2, which are used to read the video signal.

## Sampling mechanism

A video frame contains far too much data for the computer to record directly, so the frame is sampled over multiple seconds. Specifically, the ComputerEyes device samples one pixel per scanline and gradually scans across the screen at one column per frame. Thus, a 320x192 bi-level image takes 320 ÷ 59.94 = 5.3 seconds to capture. This relies on the frame being relatively stable across the capture process; if it is changing, the captured image will be a mix of all of the frames.

Only a bi-level image can be captured in a single pass. To capture a multi-level image, successive passes are required with different thresholds. The highest depth image that can be captured is a 16-level image, which takes 85 seconds to capture.

## Communication protocol

Communication with the ComputerEyes device is through the joystick direction lines of control ports 1 and 2. Five output lines and two input lines are used. Table 24 shows the usage.

Table 24: ComputerEyes controller port usage

| Port   | Input   | PORTA bit   | Direction   | Usage             | Polarity            |
|--------|---------|-------------|-------------|-------------------|---------------------|
| Port 1 | Right   | D7          | Input       | Sync sense        | 0 = sync            |
| Port 1 | Left    | D6          | Input       | Video level sense | 1 = above threshold |
| Port 1 | Down    | D5          | Output      | Sweep control     | 1 = run sweep       |
| Port 1 | Up      | D4          | N/A         |                   |                     |
| Port 2 | Right   | D3          | Output      | Threshold bit 3   | 1 = higher          |
| Port 2 | Left    | D2          | Output      | Threshold bit 2   | 1 = higher          |
| Port 2 | Down    | D1          | Output      | Threshold bit 1   | 1 = higher          |
| Port 2 | Up      | D0          | Output      | Threshold bit 0   | 1 = higher          |

## Video timing synchronization

Video sync status is sensed through PORTA bit 7, which is pulled low by the ComputerEyes whenever sync level is detected. Horizontal and vertical sync status are combined and must be distinguished in software by the length of the sync pulses.

Because horizontal sync pulses are too short for the 6502 to detect reliably - 4.7µs, or approx. 8.4 cycles - the sync pulses are stretched by the device. The minimum sensed timing is unknown, but probably around 10-15µs. It needs to be at least enough to be reliably sensed by a BIT+Bcc loop in the presence of refresh cycles.

## Capture sweep

PORTA bit 5 is set by the software to begin a capture sweep. This is normally done after detecting the vertical sync to start at a known scanline. When the sweep is enabled, the CaptureEyes device begins sampling the video signal once per scanline, comparing the brightness of the image at that point against the threshold. The result of this comparison is then held until the next sample and reported in PORTA bit 6.

Unlike the Apple II version of the ComputerEyes, which uses a synchronous 65 cycle/line loop to read the samples, the Atari version instead asynchronously samples by waiting for horizontal sync through PORTA bit 7 before reading each sample.

The ComputerEyes device automatically controls the delay timing from the start of horizontal sync to each sample, slowly increasing the delay over time. Thus, sweep timing/speed is not controllable by software, though the software can determine horizontal and vertical offset by varying when it starts recording samples. The software also determines the captured image size, which can be smaller or larger than standard 320x192.

The increase in sampling delay is continuously increased over time and not stepped on a frame basis. Thus, there is a slight skew in the captured image as lower pixels in a column are sampled a fraction of a pixel later than ones higher in the column.

When the sweep is stopped, both the sync and video bits in PORTA bits 7-6 are forced to 0.

## Threshold control

The threshold used to convert video levels to bi-level samples is determined in two ways. One is a manual adjustment knob on the device. The other is PORTA bits 0-3, which select 16 different thresholds relative to the manual adjustment, with successively higher values thresholding at brighter levels. Thus, by sampling multiple passes with 1, 3, 7, or 15 levels, the software can capture 2, 4, 8, and 16 level images. These are full resolution

images, which must be reduced in software by dithering or quantization to display through ANTIC+GTIA.

