## 7.2 Paddle

Paddle controllers consist of a single rotation knob and a trigger button. Two paddle controllers connect to a single game controller port, so up to four paddles can be attached to an XL/XE and eight paddles to a 400/800.

## Paddle knob

The rotating knob on each paddle sends a signal to the computer that allows it to read the angular position of the knob with fine accuracy. On a standard CX30 paddle, the angular range of each paddle is about 330º. The position of the knob is read through the POT0-POT7 registers in POKEY, which have a practical range of 1-228 ($01-$E4), with lower counts toward full clockwise (right) and higher counts toward full counterclockwise (left).

In order to read the paddles, the POTGO register must be written. This resets all counters and begins charging a capacitor for each paddle through the potentiometer attached to the knob, where the position of the knob controls the charge rate. Once a capacitor reaches the threshold, the corresponding bit in ALLPOT is cleared and a scan line count is latched into the corresponding POTn register. As these counts are latched from a counter running at scan line rate (15.7KHz), the count is not actually latched until that number of scan lines has passed. Typically the POTn values are read and then POTGO strobed from the vertical blank interrupt.

The exact timing and values produced by this process depend on a couple of variables, specifically the voltage threshold used by POKEY, the resistance range of the potentiometers in the paddles, and the value of the charging capacitor. The ideal formula relating a paddle position as a fraction of the rotational range and the voltage threshold is as follows:

`scanlines = ln(Vcc / (Vcc - Vthreshold)) * (1 - fraction) * R * C * 15700`

`Vcc` is 5V, `Vthreshold` is 1.9-2.6V [35], `R` is 1MΩ for CX30 paddles [36], `C` is 0.047µF, `fraction` is 0 for full left and 1 for full right. Values will vary, particularly due to the wide range in threshold voltage, but for a threshold mid-value of

[35] [AHS03] p. 22 (V T+ positive-going threshold voltage)

[36] There is a 1.8KΩ resistor in the computer in series with the potentiometer, but it is small enough in comparison that it can be ignored.

2.25V, this gives a scan line range of 1-441. Since the scan line counter only counts up to 228, only about half of the paddle range is distinguished directly (midway to full clockwise), with the left side saturating at 228. The above formula is linear in `fraction` and the potentiometer in the CX30 is also linear, so the relationship between angular position and the POTn values is also linear.

## Paddle trigger

Each paddle also has a trigger button associated with it. The paddle trigger is connected to the PIA ports, as with the joystick direction inputs. The lower of the paddle pairs - corresponding to POT0/2/4/6 - activates the left direction (bits 2/6) and the higher of the paddle pairs activates the right direction (bits 3/7). As usual, the bits are inverted and read as 0 when the button is activated.

## Fast pot scan mode

POKEY can be configured to read the paddle inputs in two scan lines instead of 228 scan lines by means of SKCTL bit 2, but this does not work with paddles for a couple of reasons. Fast pot scan mode only changes the scan clock; `POTGO` still has to be strobed to start the scan. First, the paddles charge too slowly for fast pot scan mode. The capacitance, charge rate, and threshold are still the same, so the POTn registers are simply loaded with a value 114 times as large and the 0-229 value range covers only a tiny rotational range on the right end.

The second issue is that the POTn registers will not consistently load. Normally, dumping transistors are turned on momentarily when POTGO is strobed to empty the capacitors so they begin charging up voltage from empty. These are disabled in fast pot scan mode, and thus the scan can start with capacitors already partially or fully charged. If the capacitor is partially charged, it will reach threshold sooner and the recorded count will be lower than expected. If the capacitor is already charged above threshold, the POTn register will not be updated at all.
