## 7.3 Mouse

A computer mouse consists of up to three buttons and a pair of motion detectors. There are two types of mice that can easily be connected to an 8-bit Atari, Atari ST and Amiga. The two types are similar, with minor differences in the motion encoding.

The horizontal and vertical axes are encoded using quadrature encoding on pairs of control lines, producing different cyclical patterns based on the direction of movement, either 00-01-11-10-00 or 00-10-11-01-00. The pattern repeats indefinitely as long as the mouse is moving and there is no limit to how far the mouse can move. The quadrature signals are connected to the joystick direction bits and are reflected in the PIA port, although the wiring differs between the mouse types:

|             | Bit 3/7   | Bit 2/6   | Bit 1/5   | Bit 0/4   |
|-------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| Joystick    | Right     | Left      | Down      | Up        |
| ST mouse    | YB        | YA        | XA        | XB        |
| Amiga mouse | XB        | YB        | XA        | YA        |

The pattern 0/0, 1/0, 1/1, 0/1 signifies rightward motion for the XA/XB signals and downward motion for the YA/YB signals.

The quadrature inputs must be sampled at a high rate in order for the mouse to work, as each change must be detected for motion to be measured properly. For instance, if two changes were to occur between measurements, i.e. 00 to 11, it would be impossible to determine the direction of motion. For a 100 cpi (counts per inch) mouse, this requires a minimum sampling rate of 300Hz to support motion up to 3 inches/second, with higher rates needed for faster motion or higher resolution mice. Checking the mouse from a VBI handler is

therefore unlikely to produce satisfactory results.

There are up to three buttons on a mouse. The left mouse button is connected to the joystick trigger input and can be read the same way; the right and middle mouse buttons, if present, are connected to the paddle A and B inputs. Unfortunately, the mouse connects these lines to ground instead of +5V as the paddle does, so the Atari hardware cannot read them - there is no circuitry hooked up in this configuration to charge the pot capacitors.

