## 7.4 Light Pen/Gun

Light pen and light gun devices sense the electron beam of a cathode ray tube (CRT) monitor to report the screen position of the device to the computer. They only work with CRTs that do single scan - they do not work with CRTs that scan at 100/120Hz or with LCDs.

## Sensing signal connection

As the light pen or gun senses the passing of the electron beam, it sends a pulse to the computer on the joystick trigger input on its connected joystick port. On the 400, the device must be connected to port 4, but it may be connected to any of the available ports on the 800/XL/XE models. Any trigger on any of the wired ports will register a pen position, including a non-light-sensing device such as a joystick.

## Position reporting mechanism

The appropriate trigger lines are connected to the light pen (LP) input on ANTIC, which latches the current horizontal and vertical position counters into the PENH and PENV registers. This latching only occurs on the edge when the line is asserted; if the trigger line is held down, such as from a joystick, the latched position will reflect the time of depression. This mechanism also means that the PENH/V update occurs just after the video signal for the sensed point is generated and drawn on the CRT by the beam, occurring earlier for higher positions and later for lower positions.

The PENH register reports the horizontal position with color clock resolution, from 0-227, while PENV reports the vertical position with two-line resolution, from 0-130 or 0-155, similar to VCOUNT. Latching is not limited to the visible area of the screen; ANTIC will record a location in the border or even in the blanking intervals if a pulse arrives during that time.

Note that the horizontal positions reported in PENH do not correspond to GTIA horizontal positions, for a couple of reasons. One is that it is latched from ANTIC's horizontal position counter instead of GTIA's, and another is delays in the display-to-light-pen-input path. PENH values are approximately 30-60 counts higher than GTIA positions, depending on the display and light sensing device. This offset often causes PENH values to wrap from $E3 to $00 within the active display region.

PENH and PENV will continue to reflect the last known position if no further trigger pulses arrive. They are not cleared by vertical blank.

Note that it is possible for the PENH and PENV registers to have any value in 0-255, even those corresponding to invalid beam positions. This occurs because the pen position registers are not cleared on a reset and therefore may have arbitrary contents on power-up. In particular, PENV may have the value $FF.

## On-screen detection

There is no direct way to sense if a light-sensing device is aimed at the screen. However, since the timing signal is connected to the trigger inputs, it is possible to read the TRIG0-3 registers on GTIA to determine this, since an off-screen device will not send pulses. Typically bit 2 of GRACTL is set to enable latching on the trigger inputs, making it easier to detect the pulse from a VBI routine. Otherwise, the triggering pulse can be very narrow and difficult to catch, as quick as 16 cycles.

