## 7.5 CX-75 Light Pen

The Atari CX-75 light pen is a black device about the shape and size of a thick pen, with a pushable tip and a thin cord to connect to the joystick port.

The measurements here were determined experimentally on a Commodore 1702 monitor attached to an NTSC 800XL.

## Pickup range and offset

On a Commodore 1702 monitor driven from an NTSC 800XL, a single lo-res $0F pixel at the center of the screen - hardware horizontal pos and vertical pos $80, position (80,80) on a GR.14 screen - produced PENH values around $96 to $9C, but always PENV values of $40. Pickup range was narrow side-to-side, in a circle about 4mm wide, but the light pen could detect the beam as far as 10cm away.

## Pickup range

The light pen has a relatively narrow opening about 4mm wide for the light sensor to detect the beam. For a single $0E luma lo-res point, this results in the light pen only picking up the point within around an area of that diameter when the point is close to the screen, and still only within very narrow angles when held away from the screen. For a 13' monitor like the 1702, this already limits pickup to about 1-2 color clocks, and for a larger monitor it is even more precise.

The CX-75 can detect the beam from surprisingly far away, as far as 10cm with a full white pixel, though this range is somewhat diminished with dimmer pixels. On the test system, the light pen could not pick up a $02 background, and at $04, its range was only about 1.5cm. At $06, this increased to around 4cm.

## Reported positions

The light pen is generally quite accurate and stable in vertical positions, but much less so horizontally. In the test environment, a white lores pixel in the center of the screen - hardware horizontal and vertical position $80, position (80,80) on a GR.14 screen - produced PENH values around $96 to $9C, but always PENV values of $40.

The offset in horizontal positions reported in PENH stems from several factors, including an offset between the internal horizontal position counter within ANTIC and the horizontal positions used by GTIA, and the delays from when pixels are output in the video signal by GTIA, displayed by the TV, sensed by the light pen, and finally light pen input latching delays in ANTIC.

## Horizontal position jitter

It is normal for horizontal positions to vary by ±1 due to noise. However, on XL/XE systems, the CX-75 commonly displays much larger errors of as much as ~6 color clocks. Furthermore, the noise is not random, but position dependent - it is spiky but somewhat deterministic when the light pen is held steady.

The additional positional noise is due to ringing on the trigger line causing glitches on the ANTIC LP input. Figure 16 shows an example. CH1 (yellow) shows the raw trigger input from the light pen, CH3 (purple) shows the GTIA trigger input after the filter, and CH2 (cyan) shows the final light pen input to ANTIC. In this example, the glitches are approximately 0.7µs and 1.4µs after the original falling edge. At 280ns period color clock, this corresponds to offsets of +2.5 and +5.0 counts. Under normal circumstances, the last edge would always take precedence. However, the glitches are short enough that ANTIC's triggering is unreliable, causing the PENH/V registers to update inconsistently depending on the offset of the glitches relative to the system clock. These glitches don't occur on an 800 system where the input circuitry is more tolerant.

Figure 16: CX-75 triggering glitch on NTSC 800XL

<!-- image -->

## Detected colors

For the light pen to detect the beam, the image must be bright enough for the beam to trip the light sensor. A fullbright screen is not necessary, but very dark areas of the screen can fail to trigger the sensor. On the test system, grayscale areas were picked up as dim as $04, but with low sensitivity/range, somewhat improved range at $06, and mostly full range at $08 and above. On the other hand, colors were picked up more readily, as low as luma 2. One theory for this is that colors cause one of the three color beams to be brighter than the average, which is then more easily picked up by the light pen.

Note that the exact thresholds are affected by the brightness and contrast settings of the display. Raising the brightness or contrast will make darker colors easier to pick up. If the brightness is raised enough that the black level rises, even black ($00) will work.

## Trigger timing

As the beam is sensed by the light sensor, the light pen asserts the joystick trigger signal on the controller port for a short period of time. For the CX-75, the width of this pulse is mostly uniform, varying from about 9.1-9.8 µs depending on intensity, or about 32-35 color clocks. This is always enough to trigger ANTIC's light pen input and update the PENH and PENV registers, but is difficult to detect reliably with the 6502. It can be detected by a tight polling loop, but programs that need to detect when the light pen is triggering usually need to enable trigger latching on GTIA.

Measured delays related to light pen timing include:

- ~800 ns from the rising/falling edge of AN2 between GTIA/ANTIC to the corresponding change in the composite video output.
- Very approximately 9-13 µs from the start of the pixel in the video output to the leading edge of the joystick trigger pulse from the light pen.

## Pen switch

The CX-75 also has a switch activated by pushing in the noise of the pen at the front. The switch is somewhat loose and easily pushed with its weak spring. Pressing in the tip asserts the joystick up signal, changing bit 0 or 4 of PORTA/B from 1 to 0 while the tip is depressed.

An oddify of the pen switch is that the a trigger pulse is also sent when the pen switch is depressed or released. This appears to be due to bounce noise from the switch and can result in multiple trigger pulses over hundreds of microseconds, especially on switch activation. This results in random positions being latched into the PENH/PENV registers, which must be ignored.

