## 7.9 CX-21/23/50 Keyboard Controller

The CX-21, CX-23, and CX-50 keyboard controllers have different physical shapes but the same key layout and signal interface. They connect a four row, three column keypad to a joystick port using a combination of the joystick and paddle lines.

## Signals

The four rows of the keyboard matrix are connected to the joystick lines and the three columns are connected to the paddle and trigger lines:

Table 20: Keyboard Controller key matrix

<!-- image -->

| 1        | 2        | 3       | Up    |
|----------|----------|---------|-------|
| 4        | 5        | 6       | Down  |
| 7        | 8        | 9       | Left  |
| *        | 0        | #       | Right |
| Paddle B | Paddle A | Trigger |       |

To read the matrix, the four joystick direction signals are configured as outputs and brought low one at a time. The two paddle inputs and trigger are then read to sense the columns. The trigger input will be sensed as a 1 if its column is inactive and 0 if it is active; paddle inputs will tend to read ~1-2 for inactive and ~228 for active.

## Fast pot scan mode

Unlike paddles, which only pull up the paddle lines, the keyboard controller also grounds them. This means that fast pot scan mode can be directly used with the Keyboard Controller without having to discharge the capacitors with slow scan. After enabling fast scan, the paddle inputs can be read directly by strobing POTGO and then reading ALLPOT within 228 cycles. This permits reading the Keyboard Controller much faster than once every 34 frames.

The POT0-7 registers are still not valid in this configuration by default since they do not update if the capacitors are already above charging threshold when the scan starts. They will read $E5 if a column is activated, but may retain their previous value otherwise. This limitation can be avoided by strobing POTGO in slow scan and then dynamically switching to fast scan, but this is inferior to using ALLPOT.

## Multiple key presses

As is usually the case for a keyboard matrix without diodes, pressing multiple keys on a Keyboard Controller can cause phantom keys to appear in the matrix. Two keys can always be resolved independently without phantoms; three or more will cause phantoms if they occupy a shared row and column. For instance, pressing 1, 2, and 4 is indistinguishable from also having 5 pressed.

Pressing multiple keys also has the effect of reducing the paddle position values reported by POKEY in the POT0-7 registers for non-activated keys. The effect is hardly noticeable in normal pot scan mode where the counts drop from 2-3 to 1-2, but is more noticeable in fast pot mode where readings can decline from around $B0 to as low as $60. This occurs because depressed keys on inactive rows supply additional current from high row lines to the paddle inputs on active rows through the column lines. This will occur independently for each column unless the columns are connected by two keys depressed on both paddle columns of the same row.

