## 11.2 Common memory map

## Address regions

The address pages $D1xx, D6xx, and D7xx are reserved for the currently active PBI device. In addition, $D1FF is used as a shared control location.These ranges are unused by the main computer, so when not driven by the PBI device, reads return undriven bus data.

The math pack region at $D800-DFFF is also used as a PBI firmware window.

## Device select register

PDVS [$D1FF] is the hardware select register for PBI devices. Each bit corresponds to an individual device, where setting a single bit to 1 selects that device and writing $00 deselects all devices. Only one bit should be set at a time. The response to selection is device dependent but typically involves overlaying the math pack at $D800-DFFF with device-specific firmware ROM.

The presence of the selection register at $D1FF is by convention, encouraged by the support in the XL/XE OS; it is not directly implemented or decoded by the computer and must be implemented in the PBI device. This means that devices can vary in its implementation. The Black Box, for instance, only partially decodes its address and overloads it with other device-specific control bits.

## Device IRQ status register

PDVI [$D1FF] is also the address of the shared IRQ status register. A '1' bit in this register indicates that a device is requesting an interrupt. Only the bits corresponding to present devices are pertinent and other bits may have undefined values.

The procedure for acknowledging a PBI device IRQ is device specific and must be done by the device firmware.

Like PDVS, devices connected to the PBI bus are not obligated to implement PDVI according to the PBI standard.

## PBI address region

The address range $D600-D7FF is reserved for PBI device addressing and can be used for RAM, ROM, or I/O of an actively selected PBI device. It is not ordinarily mapped by the base computer otherwise and reads as open bus.

The 1400XL/1450XLD maps an additional 512 bytes of memory in this range for its internal PBI device firmware.

## PBI memory map overlays

The MMU allows the PBI device to overlay RAM, but not any I/O, or cartridge address space. ROM also cannot be overlaid, except for the math pack region at $D800-DFFF which can be swapped out for PBI device ROM through a Math Pack Disable (MPD) signal. This is arbitrated by the CAS inhibit (/CASINH) signal, which is output as an enable to the PBI device as EXTENB.

On a 130XE, extended memory is also controlled by /CASINH and can therefore be overlaid by a PBI device. However, Ultimate1MB has its extended memory separate from the motherboard memory system and itself asserts CASINH for extended memory, which excludes it from PBI mapping. This can change the behavior of PBI devices that monitor EXTENB to detect if the self-test ROM is overlaying $5000-57FF, particularly VideoBoard XE.

On the 1400XL/1450XLD, EXTENB is high for the $D600-D7FF RAM region.

