## 11.4 CSS Black Box

The Black Box by Computer Software Services (CSS) is a device that provides SCSI, parallel printer, RS-232 port, and screenshot functionality over the PBI bus.

## Register map

The Black Box occupies the $D100-D1FF and $D600-D6FF regions of PBI address space:

Table 104: Black Box memory map

| D600-D6FF   | Black Box RAM                                             |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| D1C0-D1FF   | Status register (read only) Control register (write only) |
| D180-D1BF   | 6821 PIA                                                  |
| D170-D17F   | 6522 VIA (mirror)                                         |
| D160-D16F   | Unused                                                    |
| D150-D15F   | 6522 VIA                                                  |
| D140-D14F   | Unused                                                    |
| D120-D13F   | 6551 ACIA                                                 |
| D100-D11F   | Unused                                                    |

The control register is designed to be compatible with the OS definition of the PBI select register:

D7 RS232 data carrier detect (DCD) signal

<!-- image -->

|       | 0 1                               | Negated Asserted                  |
|-------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| D6    | RS232 clear to send (CTS) signal  | RS232 clear to send (CTS) signal  |
|       | 0                                 | Negated                           |
|       | 1                                 | Asserted                          |
| D5    | RS232 data set ready (DSR) signal | RS232 data set ready (DSR) signal |
|       | 0                                 | Negated                           |
|       | 1                                 | Asserted                          |
| D4    | SCSI MSG signal                   | SCSI MSG signal                   |
|       | 0                                 | Asserted                          |
|       | 1                                 | Negated                           |
| D0:D3 | ROM bank                          | ROM bank                          |
|       | 0000                              | None selected                     |
|       | other                             | ROM selected                      |

Similarly, the status register is compatible with the OS definition of the PBI interrupt status register:

|    | Not used              | Not used               | MNU                    | SS   | VIA   | ACIA   |
|----|-----------------------|------------------------|------------------------|------|-------|--------|
| D3 | Menu button           | Menu button            |                        |      |       |        |
|    | 0                     | Button depressed       | Button depressed       |      |       |        |
|    | 1                     | Button released        | Button released        |      |       |        |
| D2 | Screenshot button     | Screenshot button      |                        |      |       |        |
|    | 0                     | Button depressed       | Button depressed       |      |       |        |
|    | 1                     | Button released        | Button released        |      |       |        |
| D1 | VIA interrupt status  | VIA interrupt status   |                        |      |       |        |
|    | 0                     | No interrupt pending   | No interrupt pending   |      |       |        |
|    | 1                     | VIA interrupt pending  | VIA interrupt pending  |      |       |        |
| D0 | ACIA interrupt status | ACIA interrupt status  |                        |      |       |        |
|    | 0                     | No interrupt pending   | No interrupt pending   |      |       |        |
|    | 1                     | ACIA interrupt pending | ACIA interrupt pending |      |       |        |

## 6522 VIA connections

VIA port A is connected to both the SCSI and printer buses. Although the SCSI bus has inverted data compared to the standard 6502 bus, an inverting bus transceiver is used so that the stored data is non-inverted. This means that the printer output is inverted instead, however.

VIA port B is used for several miscellaneous signals:

- D0=0 (input/output): SCSI Input/Output signal asserted. This also controls the direction of the printer/SCSI data bus driver, where 1=output.
- D1=0 (input/output): SCSI Command/Data signal asserted
- D2=0 (output): SCSI SEL signal asserted
- D3=0 (output): SCSI RESET signal asserted
- D4=1 (input): Printer busy

- D5=0 (input): Printer fault (overridable by DIP switch #1)
- D6=0 (input/output): SCSI BUSY signal asserted
- D7=0 (input/output): SCSI REQ signal asserted

The VIA's CA1 and CA2 signals are used for handshaking on the SCSI bus, with REQ on CA1 and ACK on CA2.

VIA CB1 is used as a switch indicator and is pulled low when either the menu or screen dump buttons are depressed. It is normally configured to generate an IRQ on a negative transition.

VIA CB2 is used to drive the printer strobe line and is driven low at least 0.5µs to indicate that a new valid byte is on the printer bus.

## 6821 PIA connections

The BlackBox uses a 68B21 PIA, which is pin and software-compatible with the computer's 6520 PIA.

Port A is used in output mode to select the RAM bank that appears at $D600-D6FF. Bits 0-6 are used, for a total of 32K RAM addressable.

Port B bits 0 and 1 are used to read the graphics/text and hard drive write protect switches. Both are pulled down to 0 (grounded) when activated.

Port B bits 2-7 are connected to DIP switches #2-7, where a switch that is ON pulls the corresponding port line down to a 0. DIP switch #8 is unused. For 32K firmware, port B bit 2 is re-purposed as a high bank select bit and DIP switch #2 must be turned off for normal operation.

CA2 is connected to RS-232 RTS (Request To Send), while CB2 is connected to DTR (Data Terminal Ready). CA1 and CB1 are not connected.

## Caution

The Black Box has its PIA wired differently than the base computer. The main PIA in the computer has the address lines swapped, whereas the Black Box wires it conventionally. This means that the order of the four registers is port A, control A, port B, and control B on the Black Box instead of port A, port B, control A, control B.

## Firmware ROM

The original version of the Black Box has 16K of ROM mapped in 2K banks at $D800-DFFF. Banks 1, 2, 4, and 8 correspond to PBI devices seen as the OS, and therefore must contain valid entry points. In addition, banks 1 and 2 service the ACIA and VIA interrupts, respectively. Bank 0 disables the ROM.

The I/O light on the Black Box is also tied to the bank select and will light up whenever the ROM is active.

On units with 32K of ROM, there are an additional 7 banks of ROM selectable via PIA port B bit 2. Bank 8 is not accessible.

## RAM

Base versions of the Black Box also have 8K of scratch RAM mapped in 256 byte banks through $D600-D6FF. PIA port A bits 0-5 is used to select the bank. With 32K RAM, bits 0-7 are used. Finally, 64K RAM adds PIA port B bit 1 as an 8th RAM bank select bit.

## SCSI hard disk interface

The Black Box exposes its interface to SCSI hard disks through its 6522 VIA and status registers. The pertinent connections are as follows:

- VIA port A connects to the SCSI data bus. The hardware handles inversion of data written to or read from this bus, so the 6502 sees non-inverted data.
- VIA port B bits 0, 1, 6 and 7 are used in both input and output mode for I/O, C/D, BUSY and REQ. All are active low. Port B bit 0 (I/O) also controls the direction of the data bus transceiver, where 1 = output.
- VIA port B bits 2 and 3 are used in output mode to drive SEL and RESET.
- VIA control signals CA1 and CA2 are used for SCSI handshaking signals REQ and ACK.

All handshaking and control signals are connected to the VIA as active low. The 6502 largely has to drive the entire SCSI protocol in software, with the notable exception of the REQ and ACK signals. Those are connected to allow the VIA to be configured in hardware handshaking mode, automatically driving one of the signals whenever the 6502 reads data from or writes data to port A.

## Caution

The Black Box's data latch is inverted from the MIO's. The MIO has SCSI data inverted and printer data non-inverted, whereas the Black Box has SCSI data non-inverted and printer data inverted.

## Printer interface

The parallel printer port interface is driven entirely through the VIA:

- VIA port A is used to send inverted printer data.
- VIA port B bit 0 is pulled high in order to switch the SCSI/printer bus transceiver to output mode.
- VIA port B bit 4 is used in input mode to sense the printer BUSY line (1 = busy).
- VIA port B bit 5 is used in input mode to sense a printer fault (0 = fault). DIP switch #1 overrides this signal to 1 (no fault) if set. This is done directly in hardware; the switch cannot be read directly.
- VIA CB2 is connected to STROBE and is momentarily driven low to indicate to the printer that a new data byte is available.

## Serial (RS-232) interface

Serial communication primarily uses the 6551 ACIA. It is connected with a 1.8432MHz crystal for standard baud rate generation, which means that the ÷16 external clock mode is inoperative. The ACIA can generate IRQs and status register bit 0 is set when this occurs.

None of the control lines are hooked up to the ACIA, so hardware handshaking is not possible. Instead, the DSR, CTS, and DTD are read through status port bits 5-7, and RTS and DTR are driven through PIA CA2 and CB2. All are active high.

