## 11.5 CSS Black Box Floppy Board

The Black Box Floppy Board is an add-on daughterboard for the Black Box that adds parallel floppy disk capability to the Black Box.

## Added hardware

The Floppy Board adds a second 6522 VIA, a 6504 CPU, 2K of static RAM, 4K of controller ROM, and a 1770 floppy disk controller (FDC) to the Black Box. The additional controller allows the FDC to be serviced within its tight timing requirements during sector reads and writes, which the main computer's CPU can't do with DMA active.

Interfacing with the OS is through the existing Black Box firmware, using the XL/XE OS's support for routing SIO requests through Parallel Bus Interface devices. Since older versions lack support for the Floppy Board, it ships with a replacement ROM to ensure both high-speed SIO and Floppy Board support. Floppy Board compatible firmware ROMs are labeled as version 2.x and are 64K in size, in contrast to older 16K/32K ROMs.

## Supported disk drives

Up to four PC-style Shugart interface disk drives can be connected to the Floppy Board. The lowest common denominator is a single-sided, 40-track drive, which supports all official Atari disk formats as well as 160K/180K PC formats. However, the Floppy Board also supports double-sided, 80-track, and high density formats, meaning that it can also handle 8' drives as well as high-density 5.25' and 3.5' disk drives.

5.25' 1.2M drives can only be operated in high density mode, due to a lack of a connection for the density selection signal needed to switch the drive to support low density media. This is not an issue for 3.5' drives, which detect density directly from the presence or lack of a density hole in the disk.

## Floppy Board controller

The Floppy Board's controller is a 6504, which is a variant of the 6502. It is similar to the 6507 in only supporting an 8K address space (13 address lines), but has an /IRQ input instead of RDY. The 6504 runs synchronously at the same rate as the main computer (1.77 or 1.79MHz).

The 6504's /IRQ signal is connected to the Floppy Board VIA's CA2 signal. However, the controller firmware doesn't use it and permanently keeps IRQs masked.

The 6504 runs synchronously with the main computer at 1.77/1.79MHz. There is no shared memory between the computer and controller buses, however.

Table 105: Black Box Floppy Board 6504 address map

| Address    | Device                     |
|------------|----------------------------|
| $E000-FFFF | Mirror of $0000-1FFF       |
| $1000-1FFF | Controller firmware ROM    |
| $0E00-0FFF | Not mapped                 |
| $0C00-0DFF | 1772 FDC                   |
| $0A00-0BFF | Status port (read-only)    |
| $0800-09FF | Transfer port (read/write) |
| $0000-07FF | 2K static RAM              |

## Floppy Board VIA

Because there is no shared memory between the main computer and the controller, the Floppy Board adds a second 6522 VIA to the Black Box. This additional VIA is mapped into spare decoding slots on the Black Box, visible at $D140-D14F and $D160-D16F when the Black Box is selected. The VIA registers can only be accessed by the main computer side.

Although two VIAs are present on the Floppy Board, one of them is the existing VIA on the Black Box. The Floppy Board interposes itself between the Black Box and this VIA in order to tap some bus signals, but the

existing VIA's functionality is unchanged.

Table 106: Black Box Floppy Board VIA connections

| Signal   | Direction   | Connection                                                          |
|----------|-------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| CA1      | Input       | 6504 transfer port access pulse ($0800-09FF; momentary 0 on access) |
| CA2      | Output      | 6502 /IRQ                                                           |
| CB1      | -           | Not used                                                            |
| CB2      | Output      | FDC index pulse select (0 = drive, 1 = manual)                      |
| PA0-PA7  | Both        | Data transfer latch                                                 |
| PB7      | Output      | FDC manual index pulse clock                                        |
| PB6      | Output      | FDC clock select (0 = 16MHz, 1 = 8.333MHz)                          |
| PB5      | Output      | FDC density select (1 = FM, 0 = MFM)                                |
| PB4      | Output      | Side select (1 = bottom, 0 = top)                                   |
| PB3      | Output      | Drive select 3 (1 = selected)                                       |
| PB2      | Output      | Drive select 2 (0 = selected)                                       |
| PB1      | Output      | Drive select 1 (0 = selected)                                       |
| PB0      | Output      | Drive select 0 (0 = selected)                                       |

## Index pulse

The Floppy Board can either use the index pulse from the drive or synthesize it from the VIA. The CB2 output selects which is used, with 1 selecting manual index and 0 selecting drive index. It is normally driven in manual mode (high) since Atari disks do not have sectors aligned to the index.

When manual index pulse is enabled, the FDC's IP input is driven off of a pair of chained D flip flops, clocked off of the VIA's PB7 output. This is intended to be driven by VIA timer 1 in free-running mode, which toggles PB7 each time the timer 1 underflows. The result effectively quadruples the range of the VIA's 16-bit counter so an index pulse can be delivered to the FDC 5-6 times per second.

## Head stepping

Seeking the head between tracks is done by the FDC, which issues step pulses to the disk interface and controls the seek timing. All supported drives use single stepping per track instead of half-track stepping as done in the 1050.

## FDC clock

Two clock sources are available for the FDC, 8.333MHz and 16MHz. The 8.333MHz clock is used for single density and double density operation. Similarly to the XF551, it is slightly above 8MHz to compensate for 300 RPM drives being used instead of traditional Atari 288 RPM.

The 16MHz clock halves the bit cell to 1μs for high density operation. It is used with 1.2M 5.25', 1.44M 3.5', and 1M 8' disk formats. It is also used to support a 3ms/track step rate, by doubling the FDC's speed while selecting its 6ms/track setting.

A notable omission is that the Floppy Board lacks support for the clock rate necessary for operating 1.2M high density floppy drives in low density mode. 1.2M floppy drives spin at 360 RPM instead of the 300 RPM of 360K floppy drives, requiring a 20% faster clock rate to compensate. This would require a third clock selection of 10MHz to read and write 288 RPM disks at 360 RPM. However, this is a moot point as the Floppy Board is also unable to signal 1.2M drives to switch to low density media operation. High-density 1.44M 3.5' drives do not have this problem as they spin at the same 300 RPM speed as low-density 720K drives, in addition to being able

to auto-sense the density of the media itself.

## Transfer port

A byte-wide bidirectional transfer port is used to transfer data between the main 6502 CPU and controller 6504. The 6502 accesses it through port A of the Floppy Board VIA, while the 6504 has it memory mapped at $080009FF. The VIA's handshaking and latching features are used to reduce the overhead of acknowledging bytes on both sides.

For write transfers from the 6502 to the 6504, each write from the 6502 pulls CA2 low, which asserts /IRQ on the 6504 and is also reflected by bit 0 of the status port going low. The controller then reads the port A output through the transfer port, which triggers a low pulse on CA1 to raise CA2 and assert a CA1 interrupt.

For read transfers from the 6504 to the 6502, each write from the controller triggers a low pulse on CA1, latching the transfer data into the VIA IRA register, and raising an interrupt that can be polled. CA2 is manually toggled as a clock to pace the controller, with both edges triggering transfer of a new byte.

## Communication protocol

Unlike most disk drives where a microcontroller completely manages the drive, the Floppy Board splits responsibilities between the host and controller firmware. The controller has exclusive access to the FDC registers, while only the host controls drive, density, and side selection. This means that processing traditional disk drive SIO command requires action from both sides.

The commands issued to the controller are different from traditional SIO disk commands and are more physically oriented, using track/sector/side addressing instead of logical sector addressing.

