## 11.6 Atari 1090 80 Column Video Card

The Atari 1090 80 Column Video Card (CVC) was an unreleased card for the 1090XL Expansion System, providing an 80 column display through the Parallel Bus Interface. Prototypes and development information for the card have been found, however, and the following information is derived from schematics and firmware released by the Atari Historical Society [AHS-80CVC].

## Hardware

The 80CVC uses a 68B45 CRTC to drive video timing and video addressing. Video memory is provided by a 2K static RAM, which provides character names for lookup in a 2K character ROM. Firmware is additionally provided by another 2K static ROM.

The character ROM contains 8x8 character cell graphics, stored in the same format as an ANTIC mode 2 character set. Two character sets are included, each containing 128 characters of 8 bytes each; the character set is selected by a hardware jumper. Only the low 7 bits of each character name are used for lookup, with bit 7 applying inversion to the character cell.

The existing known firmware ROM has a CRC-32 of [D2777837], and the known character set ROM a CRC-32 of [829F5706]. The character set ROM contains verbatim copies of the standard and international character sets found in standard Atari OS ROMs, with the standard character set in the low half. Thus, the character names in video memory are stored as INTERNAL character codes.

## Video signal

The CRTC parameters established by the firmware create an 80x25 text area of 8-line tall character cells. The total scanned area is 114x32 with 6 extra scanlines. Character cells are 8 pixels wide in the hardware and shifted out at a dot clock of 14.318MHz. All together, this produces a 262 scan line display with a horizontal scan rate of 15.7KHz and vertical scan rate of 59.92Hz. The frame timing is thus the same as an NTSC ANTIC, though the timing is not necessarily synced with ANTIC's scan.

No color burst is emitted, so the display is monochrome and no artifacting is possible.

The video logic inverts the signal when the cursor is present. If the character cell is also inverted by bit 7 of the character name, this is XORed with the cursor, so no inversion results if both are on. The hardware cursor is not used by the firmware.

## CRTC access

The 6845's register address and data ports are mapped to $D1FA and $D1FB, respectively. $D1FA is write-only and selects a register via bits 0-4. $D1FB is read/write depending on the specific CRTC register selected.

## Video memory access

Only the low 11 of the total 14 address bits of the CRTC are used to address video RAM. It would be possible to hardware scroll the display by wrapping around the 2K VRAM address space, but the firmware does not use this capability.

An unusual write-through arrangement is used for CPU access to video memory. Bits 3-7 of $D1FC or $D1FD set the base address of the 2K video memory aperture, which can be placed anywhere in RAM on a 2K boundary. Writes to this window take place in both main memory and video memory, but reads are serviced from main memory. Thus, the contents of video memory and reads from the aperture will be out of sync until the CPU has cleared the region, but the CPU always reads the content of main memory. This is fortunate since the aperture base address is random on startup.

Because the aperture works by snooping the address and data buses and does not depend on signals from the MMU, it can be placed at any address, including over I/O and ROM regions not normally usable for external mapping over the Parallel Bus Interface.

## PBI support

The 80CVC is connected to the Parallel Bus Interface as device 0 ($01), and must be selected through $D1FF before its registers and firmware are visible. Per PBI standards, the 2K firmware is overlaid over the math pack at $D800-DFFF when the device is selected. However, the VRAM write-through aperture is always active regardless of the PBI selection state.

IRQs are not supported by the 80CVC, but the hardware pulls up D0 on a read to $D1FF to signal a lack of

Table 107: 80CVC hardware registers

| Address   | Read               | Write                 |
|-----------|--------------------|-----------------------|
| $D1FA     |                    | CRTC register address |
| $D1FB     | CRTC register data | CRTC register data    |
| $D1FC     |                    | VRAM aperture base    |
| $D1FD     |                    |                       |

interrupt.

## OS compatibility

The firmware contains a number of hardcoded addresses of internal tables and routines within the Display Handler of the internal OS ROM, and as a result will only work with the XL/XE OS.

