## 11.7 Atari 1400XL/1450XLD

The 1400XL and 1450XLD were designs that made it to prototype stage but not to production. They are modified 1200XL designs with additional hardware attached primarily as PBI devices. A few working prototypes exist, including parallel disk drives.

The 1400XL adds two PBI devices, a V: device for voice synthesis and a T: device for modem communications. The 1450XLD is a 1400XL with an additional daughterboard adding a parallel disk drive (PDD) controller. The 1400XL is used below to refer to the common base computer for both models.

## PBI interface

A unique feature of the 1400XL is 512 bytes of RAM at $D600-D7FF, dedicated for PBI device firmware usage. This address range is mapped by the MMU from memory that is normally hidden by the I/O block at $D000D7FF.

Although some internal documents referred to this RAM being divided by PBI slot, in practice the 1400XL handler firmware uses the majority of $D6xx RAM between the V:, T:, and PDD handlers at addresses that don't match their PBI slot numbers, and $D7xx is unused.

Some PBI documents describe a split between internal PBI and external PBI devices, with the internal devices using a separate IPDVI register for IRQ status. The known 1400XL/1450XLD schematics and prototypes, however, do not reflect this and both the hardware and handler use the regular PDVI [$D1FF] address for IRQ status.

## V: device

The voice synthesis device is PBI device 7 ($80) and connects a Votrax SC-01 speech synthesizer to the audio output. The SC-01 is driven by two pairs of registers only mapped when device 7 is selected, a control latch at $D100-D103 and a strobe at $D104-D107, both of which are write-only. The control latch stores an IRQ enable in bit 7 (1 = enabled), and a phoneme code in bits 0-5. A write to $D104-D107 then sends the currently latched phoneme to the SC-01.

Additionally, the SC-01's acknowledge/request (A/R) line is connected to the IRQ signal, appearing in PDVI [$D1FF] bit 7. The IRQ becomes active, and bit 7 becomes set, whenever the SC-01 needs a new phoneme, which occurs when it is idle or shortly before the end of the currently playing phoneme. This allows for interruptdriven queuing of strings of phonemes. PDVI bit 7 indicates A/R status regardless of whether the IRQ is enabled in $D100-D103 bit 7, allowing for polled operation.

## T: device

The modem device is PBI device 1 ($02) and consists of a 6551 ACIA and a 74HC942 modem, allowing for communication at 300 baud. It supports pulse/tone dialing, auto-answer, and ring detection.

$D108-D10B are mapped to a single write-only control register controlling miscellaneous functions:

- D7 is borrowed for ATTN on the disk controller.

- D6=1 enables analog loopback on the modem.
- D5=1 enables phone audio, connecting the phone line to the audio output.
- D4=1 takes the phone off hook.
- D3=1 connects internal audio to the modem's auxiliary mixing input for tone dialing. This includes POKEY, PBI, SIO, and speech audio, but not GTIA.
- D2=1 shuts off the direct path for internal audio to the audio output. This is normally used along with D3=1, so that internal audio is coupled to the audio output only through the modem.
- D1=1 selects originating mode for the modem, while D1=0 selects answering mode. This switches the frequency pair used by the modem.
- D0=1 squelches the modem transmitter for dialing or otherwise to suppress carrier.

Pulse dialing is performed by toggling the off hook bit, while tone dialing is done by routing internal audio through the modem and playing DTMF tones through POKEY.

The ACIA has its four registers are mapped to $D10C-D10F when the T: device is enabled. It is able to trigger interrupts through PDVI bit 1. For control line inputs, /DCD is connected to modem carrier detect and /DSR to ring detection, while /CTS is hardwired low (asserted). Neither the /RTS nor /DTR outputs are connected.

Both the ACIA and the control latch are cleared on reset, with the control latch being set to $00.

## Parallel Disk Drive

On the 1450XLD, PBI device 0 ($01) selects the Parallel Disk Drive, which is a double-density disk drive controller. See the Disk Drives chapter for more info on the PDD.

