## 10.10 810 hardware

While a standard 810 does not allow custom code execution, ones with revision E or other modified firmware do, and in those cases it becomes necessary to know how to access the 810 hardware.

## CPU

The 810 uses a 6507 CPU running at 0.5MHz (500KHz). The 6507 only has 13 address bits and can only access 8K of memory; this is the same memory model as a 6502 with A13-A15 ignored and thus all memory ranges are mirrored eight times in the 64K address space. The 6507's memory map is as follows:

Table 60: 810 memory map

| Address range   | Mapping                 |
|-----------------|-------------------------|
| $0800-0FFF      | ROM (2K)                |
| $0700-07FF      | RIOT registers (mirror) |
| $0680-06FF      | 6810 memory (mirror)    |
| $0600-067F      | 1771 FDC (mirror)       |
| $0500-05FF      | RIOT memory (mirror)    |
| $0480-04FF      | 6810 memory (mirror)    |
| $0400-047F      | 1771 FDC (mirror)       |
| $0380-03FF      | RIOT registers          |
| $0300-037F      | RIOT registers (mirror) |
| $0280-02FF      | 6810 memory (mirror)    |
| $0200-027F      | 1771 FDC (mirror)       |
| $0180-01FF      | RIOT memory             |
| $0100-017F      | RIOT memory (mirror)    |
| $0080-00FF      | 6810 memory             |
| $0000-007F      | 1771 FDC                |

A12 is not used for any decoding, and thus in a stock 810 all address ranges are mirrored 16 times at every 4K. There is no DMA or memory refresh in the 810, so all memory cycles are available for the CPU and the 6507 runs at a constant speed.

The 6507 also has no interrupts, either IRQ or NMI. This means that the NMI vector is unused and the IRQ vector is only used for BRK instructions, which can be executed without fear of interference with interrupts.

## 1771 Floppy Drive Controller

The floppy drive controller used in the 810 is a Western Digital FD1771 or equivalent, which only handles single density. For speed it is mapped in the lower half of page zero, with the canonical range being $00-03. The 1771 is run at 1MHz timings and is missing several of the usual connections to the drive hardware.

First, none of the head stepping and loading signals are hooked up. The stepper motor phases are controlled through RIOT instead of the FDC, the head is always loaded, and there is no track 0 sensor. The seek commands on the FDC are not used for seeking the head and the FDC is simply told which track it should use for comparisons against the track field in sector address fields.

Second, no index pulse sensor is hooked up either. Instead, the index pulse input to the FDC is driven by the IRQ signal from the RIOT, traditionally asserted via the RIOT's timer. This places write track and sector search timeouts under control of the firmware and allows the 810 to read and write sectors across the index position. The 810 in fact has no way of even determining the position of the index on the disk.

An additional quirk is that the 1771 FDC has an inverted data bus. This requires all register read and writes to the FDC to be inverted by the CPU, and is also responsible for the standard of inverted data on Atari floppy disks.

## 6810 RAM

The 6810 provides 128 bytes of memory at $80-FF, used mainly by the 6507 as the transfer buffer for FDC reads/writes and data frame transmission with the computer. This memory is also mirrored at $180-1FF so that its upper portion can hold the stack.

## ROM

2K of ROM provides the firmware for the drive. Its canonical address range is $0800-0FFF, although $F800FFFF is also required in order for interrupt vectors to be read.

## 6532 RAM I/O Timer (RIOT)

The RIOT chip provides a majority of the support functions in the 810, providing memory for the stack and working variables, timing facilities, and control of all the miscellaneous signals. The canonical ranges are $018001FF for the memory and $0380-039F for the control registers.

The timer facility is mainly used to drive the index pulse facility on the FDC, but does not need to match the actual rotational timing of a floppy disk and is typically not set to do so; instead, it is used to force the FDC to time out if a sector is not found on a track or the FDC would otherwise continue indefinitely with a command. This can also be done with the PA7 edge detection feature since both are connected to a common IRQ output, but this usage is less common (some versions of the Happy diagnostic do so).

The 810 firmware relies on an undocumented quirk of the RIOT timer in that once the initial delay has expired and the timer switches to 1T timing, it will continuously underflow and reassert the timer IRQ every 256 cycles. This is used by the firmware to force a series of quick 'index pulses' after a multi-rotational delay of about half a second has expired, quickly making the FDC think that five revolutions have passed. For this to work, the firmware needs to repeatedly read the timer in order to deassert the timer IRQ after each revolution.

The RIOT's I/O ports are connected to a wide variety of signals:

## Track stepping

As previously noted, the 810 does not use the FDC to step the head between tracks, and instead drives the stepper phases using PB2-PB5 on the RIOT. One reason for this is that the 810's drive mechanism uses a 4phase stepper motor instead of 3 phases as expected by the FDC. Two adjacent phases are activated at the same time whenever the head is being stepped or held in position during a read or write operation; all phases are turned off when the drive goes idle. A shift of one phase in the stepper motor steps the head by one track.

Because no track 0 sensor is hooked up, the 810 cannot determine when the head is over track 0 and instead simply steps the head outward a bit more than 40 tracks to recalibrate. This causes the head to bump against the track 0 stop slightly. Phases 1 and 4 are active when the head is at track 0, i.e. %1001 for PB2-PB5; stepping inward to higher numbered tracks requires turning on successive phases in a pattern of %0011 for track 1, %0110 for track 2, etc.

