## 10.11 Happy 810

The Happy 810 is an 810 disk drive modified with a larger, custom firmware ROM and an additional 3K of RAM. Custom code can be uploaded to the drive, allowing new functions to be added to the firmware.

## Memory map

The Happy 810 maps 3K of RAM at $0800-13FF and 3K of ROM to $1400-1FFF. The firmware is stored in a 4K ROM, but the bottom 1K of it is inaccessible to the drive and can only be read in an external ROM reader. The top 2K of the firmware at $1800-1FFF is a modified version of the 810 rev. C firmware, relocated from $08000FFF and patched. Many routines, such as the transfer routines, are in analogous positions.

[70] Note that the drive codes are encoded using a Gray code, not binary.

[71] The SIO data lines are named from the computer side, so the SIO data input line is an output for the 810.

Table 61: 810 RIOT I/O port assignments

| Port   | Signal   | Direction   | Usage                                   | Polarity             |
|--------|----------|-------------|-----------------------------------------|----------------------|
| Port A | PA7      | Input       | FDC DRQ                                 | 1 = DRQ asserted     |
| Port A | PA6      | Input       | FDC INTRQ                               | 1 = INTRQ asserted   |
| Port A | PA5      | Input       | Jumper                                  |                      |
| Port A | PA4      | Input       | Write protect sensor                    | 1 = write protected  |
| Port A | PA3      | Output      | ROM bank switch (Archiver only)         |                      |
| Port A | PA2      | Input       | Drive code A sense 70                   | 1 = D1/D2, 0 = D3/D4 |
| Port A | PA1      | Output      | Spindle motor control                   | 1 = enabled          |
| Port A | PA0      | Input       | Drive code B sense                      | 1 = D1/D4, 0 = D2/D3 |
| Port B | PB7      | Input       | SIO data output (computer to device) 71 | inverted             |
| Port B | PB6      | Input       | SIO command                             | 1 = asserted         |
| Port B | PB5      | Output      | Stepper phase 4                         | 1 = activated        |
| Port B | PB4      | Output      | Stepper phase 3                         | 1 = activated        |
| Port B | PB3      | Output      | Stepper phase 2                         | 1 = activated        |
| Port B | PB2      | Output      | Stepper phase 1                         | 1 = activated        |
| Port B | PB1      | Input       | SIO ready                               | 1 = ready            |
| Port B | PB0      | Output      | SIO data input (device to computer)     | non-inverted         |

Table 62: Happy 810 memory map

<!-- image -->

| Address range   | Mapping                 |
|-----------------|-------------------------|
| $1400-1FFF      | ROM (3K)                |
| $0800-13FF      | RAM (3K)                |
| $0700-07FF      | RIOT registers (mirror) |
| $0680-06FF      | 6810 memory (mirror)    |
| $0600-067F      | 1771 FDC (mirror)       |
| $0500-05FF      | RIOT memory (mirror)    |
| $0480-04FF      | 6810 memory (mirror)    |
| $0400-047F      | 1771 FDC (mirror)       |
| $0380-03FF      | RIOT registers          |
| $0300-037F      | RIOT registers (mirror) |
| $0280-02FF      | 6810 memory (mirror)    |
| $0200-027F      | 1771 FDC (mirror)       |
| $0180-01FF      | RIOT memory             |
| $0100-017F      | RIOT memory (mirror)    |
| $0080-00FF      | 6810 memory             |
| $0000-007F      | 1771 FDC                |

In the revision 7 version of the firmware, the firmware was extended to 6K by bank switching. Banks are selected by reading or writing $1FF8 and $1FF9. The bottom 1K of each bank is inaccessible. The revision 7 firmware adds write buffering and a number of Happy 1050 compatible commands to the drive.

## Memory read/write commands

No new commands are added in the Happy 810. The only added functionality are memory read and write subcommands, which can then be used to patch into the command handler.

To access RAM, a sector read or write command is issued with a 'sector' in the range of $0800-1380. 128 bytes of RAM at that address are then read or written to the drive according to the standard command protocol. An attempt to read or write any other address fails with a command NAK. For writes, command $57 must be used, not command $50.

## Track buffering

The Happy 810 buffers tracks by default when reading sectors.

## Command handler patch

It is possible to upload a patch at $0800 to inject custom commands into the command handler. This is composed of three sections:

- $0800-0808: Custom command signature. These bytes must be exactly: $26 11 34 14 15 57 37 85 86. They have no meaning other than as a signature.
- $0809-0820: Dispatch addresses for commands $50-57, as a table of JMP instructions.
- $0821+: Memory available for custom command implementation.

Because the drive does not preinitialize these tables, successfully uploading a custom command table to the drive typically requires knowledge of addresses within the firmware. A relocated and slightly patched version of the standard 810 rev. C firmware resides at $1800-1FFF in the bank visible at command dispatch. All standard command entry points, as well as utility functions for sending and receiving data, are in the same locations with a

$1000 offset.

## Fast/slow switch (rev. 7 only)

The rev. 7 firmware supports a fast/slow switch by means of bits 3 and 5 on port A of the RIOT. 72 If PA3 and PA5 are connected together, allowing PA3 to drive PA5, then the firmware interprets this as a signal to disable track buffering and run in slow mode.

## High speed commands (rev. 7 only)

The built-in firmware supports high-speed versions of the read, write, and put sector commands as $72, $77, and $70, respectively. The command frame and command ACK/NAK are sent at low speed, while the completion/error and data frame are sent at 38,400 baud ($10 divisor).

## Quiet command (rev. 7 only)

Command $51 ('Q') turns off the drive motors immediately. AUX1/2 are ignored.

## Happy command (rev. 7 only)

Command $48 ('H') is a command with multiple functions, multiplexed by AUX1.

## Set idle timeout (AUX1=$01)

Sub-command $01 sets the inactivity timeout for the drive. AUX2 sets the timeout in units of about 50ms.

## Set alternate device ID (AUX1=$02)

Sub-command $02 changes the alternate device ID for the drive. Bits 0-6 of AUX2 set the alternate device ID, while bit 7 determines whether the drive only responds to the alternate ID. For instance, for a drive normally configured for D1: by hardware switches, $34 would map it to both D1: and D4:, and $B4 would map the drive to D4: only. In the latter case, the drive would no longer respond to D1:.

The change to the device ID does not take place immediately, but is instead queued for the next disk change.

## Reinitialize drive (AUX1=$03)

Sub-command $03 reinitializes the drive by performing a software reset. The Complete byte is actually sent before the reset instead of after, as the drive forgets all state when the reset occurs; this means that the drive will be uncommunicative for a short time afterward.

## Configure drive (AUX1=$04-FF)

Sub-commands $04-FF reconfigure the Happy-specific functionality of the drive. The bits in AUX1 determine the mode bits to change, while the bits in AUX2 are the new states for those mode bits. Table 63 lists the functions of the individual mode bits.

[72] The 810 mod is documented in [Happy] p. 31.

Table 63: Happy 810 rev.7 drive mode bits

| Bit         | Function (if set)                  |
|-------------|------------------------------------|
| Bit 6 ($40) | Disable track read/write buffering |
| Bit 5 ($20) | Disable track write buffering      |
| Bit 2 ($04) | Enables alternate device ID        |

Thus, AUX1=$58, AUX2=$40 would disable track buffering and restore normal write protect sensing.

Changes to all but the track buffering modes - bit 2 - take effect immediately. Track buffering and write buffering can be disabled immediately, but read buffering can only be enabled if it has already been initialized, and write buffering cannot be enabled immediately; otherwise, these changes take effect on the next disk change.

Unlike the Happy 1050, the Happy 810 does not have the ability to go into 'unhappy mode' by command. Instead, the Happy Warp menu uploads custom dispatch code to the drive to disable extended commands.

## Multi-drive broadcast ($36-38) (rev. 7 only)

Commands $36-38 are used to broadcast data from the computer to multiple Happy 810 drives simultaneously. The 3K of Happy RAM is divided into 24 sectors of 128 bytes each, which are also tracked by 24 byte flags. The commands allow the computer to send the same sector data to all drives in one transmission, verify that the drives received the data, and then trigger all drives to write the data to disk. The firmware only provides the broadcast commands; custom code must be uploaded to the drive to actually use the data. All commands use high speed for the data frame and result portions of the protocol (38400 baud).

Command $38 is used to broadcast to multiple drives that are set to use the same alternate device ID. It is unique in not sending any response back from the drive, avoiding conflicts between the multiple drives receiving the same command. The command receives a 128 byte data frame, which is uploaded to drive RAM at the address specified in AUX1/2, within $0800-13FF. The corresponding flag is also set to indicate that the sector was received successfully.

Commands $36 and $37 are used to verify reception. $36 clears all sector flags and then returns Complete; $38 reads back the sector flags as a 24-byte frame. Each byte is $FF for a successfully received sector, or $00 if the sector was not received or had a checksum error.

