## 10.12 810 Turbo

The 810 Turbo Double Density Conversion Board by Neanderthal Computer Things (NCT) is an expansion that uniquely adds double-density support to the 810, providing true double-density operation.

## Hardware

To support MFM operation, the 810 Turbo replaces more hardware than usual. The 6507 CPU is retained but raised in clock rate from 500KHz to 1MHz, the FD1771 floppy drive controller is replaced by a 2791, and 4K of static RAM is added. To support this, A12 is now also decoded. Table 64 shows the memory map with the new mapping in green.

Table 64: 810 Turbo memory map

<!-- image -->

The 2791 floppy drive controller has an inverted data bus, like the 1771 in the 810 and unlike the 2793/2797 in the 1050.

The official V1.2 firmware is 2K in size with a CRC32 of 0126A511.

## Supported feature set

In addition to the standard set of 810 commands, the 810 Turbo supports the Read/Write PERCOM Block commands and a special memory access command.

While the hardware should support it, the firmware does not support medium (enhanced) density. It can only read and write single or double density disks.

## Density switching

The 810 Turbo only detects density on the first read/write sector command to a disk and retains that density mode thereafter. It will not switch to another density unless either the computer is power-cycled, which reenables density detection, or the density setting is overridden by a Write PERCOM Block command. The density check relies on the standard timeout for a record not found (RNF) error, which leads to a long delay on the initial access. The firmware continues toggling density modes until retries are exhausted or the operation succeeds.

## Status command

Double-density disks are reported with bit 5 set in the first status byte, like other drives.

The format timeout for the 810 Turbo is $FF.

## PERCOM block support

For Read PERCOM Block, the firmware returns a step rate of 3, present flag of $01, and zero for unused bytes. The remaining bytes are set as expected for standard SD and DD formats.

The Write PERCOM Block command is very minimally implemented: it fails with Error on an attempt to set a

double-sided format and then checks if the density byte is non-zero for SD/DD. Everything else in the PERCOM block is ignored and unvalidated.

## Memory access command ($20)

Access to drive memory and code execution is allowed through a single custom command, $20. Bits 0-5 of AUX2 provide A8-A13 of the address while AUX1 provides A0-A7. Bit 6 of AUX2 specifies the transfer direction, 0 for writing to drive memory and 1 for reading from it. 256 bytes are always transferred.

For write operations, setting bit 7 also causes the firmware to execute the code at the given load address. RTS returns to the service loop. In V1.2 firmware, $0800-08FF is used by the firmware for buffering command and data frames, but otherwise the whole 4K RAM is uncommitted and available for use. Addresses $009A-00BD contain the command table as triplets of command ID, handler low byte, handler high byte.

