## 10.13 815 disk drive

The Atari 815 is a dual-mechanism double density disk drive, with support for both a top drive (drive 1) and bottom drive (drive 2). Actual working units exist but in very low numbers, as reportedly as low as 50 handassembled units were shipped before the drive was canceled.

## Format support

The 815 only supports double density disks, with 256 bytes per sector. The hardware and firmware are unable to use FM encoding, and thus cannot support single density. Theoretically the hardware could support enhanced density as it simply uses a 128 byte sector size in MFM instead of 256 bytes, but the firmware has no support for it. The drive therefore could not be used with DOS 2.0S and required DOS 2.0D instead, which was the same as 2.0S except for being reconfigured to use 256 byte sectors.

There is also some provision in the hardware and firmware for double-sided and 80 track operation, but both are incomplete: the firmware lacks track/sector translation support for side 2 or 80 tracks, and reportedly 815 units were shipped without parts on the circuit board for the top side.

Support for the double-sided format is standard: 40 tracks with 18 sectors per track and 256 bytes per sector, using IBM format. The first three boot sectors on track 0 are encoded on disk as 256 bytes but read or written by the computer as 128 bytes, and the status command returns the first byte with bit 5 set to indicate double density. However, 815 disks are not interoperable with other double-density disk drives, because the 815 does not store sector data inverted as other drives do. Other drives can read disks written by an 815, but all data will be read inverted.

## Commands

In addition to the standard status, read sector, and write/put sector commands, the 815 also supports some unique commands that were enumerated in the Atari Home Computer Operating System User's Manual, but never supported by any other disk drive. Although the Operating System Manual does not describe the details of these commands, they are specified in detail in the 815 Dual Disk Drive Operator's Manual [815].

## Download ($20)

This is a write command that takes a 128 byte data frame and stores it in $0000-007F, which is then called at $0000. The routine is expected to RTS back to the firmware with four status bytes, the first three of which are returned in A, X, and Y. The fourth byte is stored on the stack immediately above the return address at 3,S and can be modified by the called routine.

## Note

The 815 Dual Disk Drive Operator's Manual specifies that this command accepts a 256 byte data frame, but the actual firmware only accepts a 128 byte frame.

## Spin test ($51)

Seeks to the track containing the sector number in AUX1/2 and then exits back to the main loop with the spindle motor still running, until the next command is issued.

## Status ($53)

This command reads the same four byte status frame on the 815 as on other disk drives, with a couple of important differences.

First, bit 6 is always set on the 815. This signifies double-sided operation on some other drives like the XF551, but the 815 only supports single-sided operation. However, this bit is not generally reliable anyway as disk drives usually do not try to detect whether a disk is double-sided.

A more serious issue is that the 815 sets the second byte to non-inverted FDC status, versus other drives reporting inverted status. For example, a successful sector read will set the second byte to $00, and a missing sector will set it to $10.

## Read address ($54)

Intended to read memory from the address at AUX1/2. Unfortunately, the firmware implementation is broken and due to a register conflict it always returns 256 bytes of firmware ROM starting at between $1100-11FF.

## Motor delay ($55)

Extends the default motor idle timeout from 3 seconds to 30 seconds.

## Verify sector ($56)

Same as write sector ($57), except that the actual disk write is skipped so that the data frame is only verified against the sector on disk.

## Extended info ($58)

Returns a 128 byte fixed descriptor of unknown format from the firmware ROM.

## High-speed operation

Despite some references to 31.5Kbaud operation in publicly released source code listings of the firmware, there is no support in the firmware for high-speed operation. The listings imply that this was intended to be added in the 2K ROM expansion that was never shipped; the base 4K firmware only contains support for high-speed dispatch hooks that are never activated and cannot be used (they jump to existing ROM locations used for other purposes).

## Motor timeout

Unusually, not only does the 815 support two disk drives, it also supports independent motor idle timeouts for

each of them: after accessing D1: and D2: in quick succession, both motors will be on, and then D1: will turn off shortly before D2: turns off. However, since the motor idle logic can only run in the main loop, both motors will keep running as long as a disk operation is in progress.

## Error behavior

The 815 lacks either a disk ready latch or a track 0 sensor. It will still attempt to read even if no disk is in the drive or the head is unlatched, and when recalibrating bump the head against the track 0 stop.

The firmware has severe bugs in the handling of the FDC status in the second status byte. The most serious bug is that it uses the wrong polarity and doesn't emulate the inverted status of the 810, which means that the 815 always reports inverted status from all other drives, including a no-error value of $00 instead of $FF. It also fails to consistently clear old status and will leak old CRC errors along with new Record Not Found (RNF) errors, sometimes producing $18 codes instead of $10.

Several error conditions also are reported differently by the 815 due its lack of FDC and the way it handles address and data fields. It precomputes and searches for the entire address field rather than just a matching sector number, so address field CRC errors and long sectors are never matched and are either reported as RNF or another sector with the same ID is used instead. Sectors with non-zero side fields are also reported as RNF. Sectors with user-defined or deleted data address marks of $F8-FA are reported as errors without reading the sector or setting any FDC error bits, so data is not returned as some protection code expects and the record type bits are never set. Finally, a write protect error results in an Error result but leaves the existing FDC status unchanged.

## Read/write latency

Despite its fast 2MHz CPU, the 815 has higher latency for reading and writing double density sectors than other double density capable drives. The primary culprit is the lack of FDC requiring the 6507 to compute the CRC-16 in software, which is particularly slow for the data field. This is done through shift-and-add in the firmware due to lack of space for table lookup, and takes 16.6ms for 256 bytes. On other drives, this is computed by the FDC during the read or write operation with no additional delay.

