## 10.15 1050 disk drive

The 1050 disk drive is a double-density drive capable of storing 130K on a diskette instead of the 90K of the 810. This is done by using double-density MFM encoding, allowing 26 128-byte sectors to be stored per track instead of 18, for a total of 1040 sectors. The stock 1050 does not support true double density with 256 byte MFM sectors.

## Disk sense

Unlike the 810, the 1050 is able to sense when a disk is inserted since the drive latch is connected to the floppy drive controller's ready input. FDC status bit 7 reflects this status, and the firmware also uses this to determine when a disk change has occurred. When a disk is inserted and the latch is closed, the drive seeks to track 1 and issues the READ ADDRESS command to detect whether the disk is using FM (single density) or MFM (double

density) encoding.

Different revisions of the 1050 firmware react differently to attempts to read or write sectors without a disk or with the mechanism unlatched. Revisions H and J of the firmware turn on the motor before returning an error, while revisions K and L return an error without turning on the motor.

## Status command

The status command in the 1050 returns one additional bit of information: drive status bit 7 indicates the disk encoding. If bit 7 is cleared, the disk is formatted as single density (18 sectors per track), whereas if it is set, the disk is formatted as enhanced density (26 sectors per track).

The write protect bits (bit 4 of drive status and bit 6 of FDC status) are updated every time the status command is issued, even if no disk drive mechanism activity occurs. Even if the latch is open and the drive motor is off, the status command will still reflect the change in the write protect sense as disks are inserted and removed.

When no disk is inserted, bit 7 of the FDC status byte will be cleared to indicate a not ready condition.

## Format Medium Density command

The format medium density ($22 = ''') command formats a disk using double-density encoding instead of single density. It otherwise operates similarly to the original $21 format command.

## Testing commands

The 1050 has an extensive number of undocumented testing modes used by the 1050 diagnostics software to test the drive. They are triggered by command $23, which is a write command that takes a 128 byte buffer with a subcommand in the first byte and sometimes a parameter in the second byte. For sub-commands $00 and $01, a second command $24 is needed, a read command that executes the test and reads back the result as another 128 byte buffer.

The $23 and $24 testing commands are not very well supported by other drives, even 1050 drives with modified firmware. No other Atari drive supports them, and in modified 1050 firmware, these commands are often either not implemented or reduced to save on ROM space.

Command $24 has another side effect -- when invoked with any sub-command other than $01, it also returns ROM signature bytes in the last three bytes of the returned buffer. The intended three bytes are revision (ATASCII), and the model number as binary big endian (1050). However, due to an addressing bug in rev. H and rev. J ROMs, the returned values are off by one byte in those versions. This is fixed in rev. K and L.

Table 67: 1050 returned ROM signatures

|        | Byte 125   | Byte 126   | Byte 127   |
|--------|------------|------------|------------|
| Rev. H | $AA        | $48        | $04        |
| Rev. J | $AA        | $4A        | $04        |
| Rev. K | $4B        | $04        | $1A        |
| Rev. L | $4C        | $04        | $1A        |

## Subcommand $00 (RPM test)

Measures the speed of the spindle motor by measuring the time between successive reads of sector 1 on the current track. Command $24 is needed afterward to begin the test and read back the results. If successful, the period between the two reads is stored in units of 100us in the first word of the returned sector buffer.

## Subcommand $01 (Motor start test)

Seeks to track 20, turns off the spindle motor for 5 seconds and lets the disk come to a complete stop, then spins up the motor and measures the time until the FDC can read a valid address field. Command $24 is required afterward to actually execute the test and read back the results. The first word of the returned buffer contains approximately the number of milliseconds needed for the spin-up, and the last six bytes of the buffer have the address field that was successfully read, if any.

## Subcommand $02 (Head step/settle test)

Steps through all 40 tracks on disk, reading sector 1 of each track and then reading the address field of the next sector in physical order, verifying that it reads successfully and that the sector number is equal to or lower than the expected max. Sector 0 is allowed despite not being valid. The highest sector number expected is given in the second data frame byte.

## Subcommand $03 (Step half track)

Steps the head by a half -track in either direction. The second byte of the data frame selects the direction -- $00 for outward to track 0, $01 for inward to track 39. 73

## Subcommand $04 (Double-density burn-in test)

Runs a lengthy read/write test with MFM enabled.

## Subcommand $05 (Seek to track)

Seeks the head to the track number given by the second data frame byte. Error is returned if the track number is invalid (above 39).

## Transmission timing

Like the 810, the 1050 also uses its CPU to bit-bang data across the serial port, but it has a faster 1MHz processor. The transmit routine takes 51 cycles per bit and 549 cycles per byte, producing a transmit rate of 19608 baud, a read sector tone of 911Hz, and a read rate of 1822 bytes/second. This results in the computer producing noticeably lower tones when reading from a 1050 versus an 810.

## Seek timing

The 1050 steps by half tracks a time since it uses an 80 track mechanism. The step rate is 10ms, giving 20ms per track, followed by a 20ms head settling delay.

## Seek anomaly

A strange behavior of the 1050 is that it has slightly longer seek times when seeking inward to higher-numbered tracks than when seeking outward. When seeking inward, the 1050 does an additional half-track step inward, followed by a half-track step outward. This ensures that the 1050 always finishes a seek with an outward step, for better consistency in head positioning.

[73] The stock 1050 firmware checks bit 7 for this, but the 1050 Turbo checks for zero/non-zero.

## Write protect handling

Another slight quirk is that the 1050 treats a write protect failure as a recalibrating error: it will restore to track 0 and reseek upon trying to write to a write protected disk, despite reseeking being unlikely to resolve the error.

## Formatted track layout

Medium density disks are formatted by 1050 with a 13:1 interleave, separating even and odd sectors within each track. There is about a two sector skew between tracks such that track 2, sector 1 has approximately the same angular position as track 1, sector 5.

## Long sector handling

Unlike the 810, which reads FDC status immediately after transferring 128 data bytes from the FDC during read sector commands, the 1050 always waits for the command to complete before reading drive status. This leads to different FDC status values when reading long sectors of 256 bytes or more. In particular, the DRQ and lost data bits will be asserted due to the additional data being ignored by the firmware, the BUSY flag will be negated, and the CRC error bit will accurately reflect where the CRC was correct on the entire sector, regardless of the data bytes that were dropped. This generally produces FDC status values of either $F9 for sectors with correct CRCs and $F1 for sectors with bad CRCs.

## User record types

Due to differences in the FDC chips, the 1050 also differs in behavior from the 810 in handling of two of the four record types that can be encoded into a sector data field. Specifically, the 1771 in the 810 reports both of the record type bits in bits 5-6 of the FDC status register, while the 279X in the 1050 only reports bit 1 of the data address mark (DAM) in bit 5. This means that the 1050 is unable to distinguish the $FA and $F9 user record types from the normal $FB and deleted $F8 record types, and more importantly, returns an FDC status of $DF instead of $9F for $F8 deleted records.

## Firmware revisions

## Revision E (CRC32 F9A7AFB2)

Earliest known publicly released firmware.

## Revision H (CRC32 6D9D589B)

Next known publicly released firmware after rev. E, with a few compatibility fixes and many reliability fixes.

There is now a timeout in the SIO receive code when waiting for a start bit, so the drive doesn't hang indefinitely.

Rev. E checked the AUX1/2 bytes for a valid sector number even for commands that don't take a sector number. In Rev. H, these bytes are now ignored for those commands.

Read/write sector commands for sector 0 are now trapped and rejected. In rev. E, attempting to read or write sector 0 results in an attempt to seek to track 56.

The Format command fills sectors with $00 instead of $E5, as seen by the computer ($FF or $1A on disk).

Fixes the Status command to return cached FDC status from the last read/write sector operation and only update from the FDC on a subsequent Status command. In rev. E, the Status command always returns the current type I status.

The sector buffer is no longer cleared after every command in rev. H. This reduces command latency and fixes a compatibility issue compared to the 810 when a Read command completes without having read a data frame from the disk.

In Rev. E, the double half-step in and then out to force a final outward step when seeking was suppressed for track 39. In rev. H, this is also done for track 39 for consistency.

Rev. H now enables side compare for read/write sector operations, unlike rev. E which has side compare disabled. (This was later re-disabled in rev. L.)

## Revision J (CRC32 91BA303D)

Next publicly released firmware after Revision H. Besides bumping the revision byte, it has a minor adjustment to the SIO receive routine to improve timing margin for PAL.

The OS approximates 19200 baud as 94 cycles/byte when sending, which at the 1050's 1MHz translates to 52.5 cycles for NTSC and 53.0 cycles for PAL. In Revision H, the receive loop takes 51 cycles/bit; Revision J adjusts this to 52 cycles/bit to improve timing margins. This particularly helps with PAL, for which the timing error in Revision H is almost 40% of a bit cell by the stop bit.

## Revision K (CRC32 3ABE7EF4)

Fixes a bug in the ROM checksum routine that prevented the computed checksum from actually being verified.

Improves the receive timing for PAL further, by adding another cycle to the receive routine (53 cycles/bit). This is a wash for NTSC, which is about 10% off at the end either way.

Adds an early check for disk ready before initiating read/write sector commands. Revision J spins up the spindle motor before returning an error, whereas revision K returns an error without turning on the mechanism.

The diagnostic double-density write test (command $23 subcommand $04) has been modified to let the motors idle for ~36 seconds between each phase of the test.

Command $24 was fixed to properly return the intended three signature bytes (revision, model ID lo/hi). In rev J, the location was off by one byte and a garbage byte was returned ($AA 4A 04). In rev K, the addressing was corrected and $4B 04 1A is returned.

## Revision L (CRC32 FB4B8757)

Revision L changes the FDC command bytes used by the firmware for Read Sector and Write Sector commands from $A2/$82 to $A8/$88 for compatibility with the 2797 FDC, which interprets the pertinent bits for alternate sector length instead of side compare. Previous firmware revisions only work with the 2793, whereas Revision L can use either the 2793 or 2797.

