## 10.17 1450XLD disk drive

The Parallel Disk Drive is the internal disk drive of the 1450XLD prototype. It is unlike most other disk drives in that it is connected to the Parallel Bus Interface instead of the Serial I/O bus. The PDD hardware supports double-sided, double density disks.

There are two variations of the PDD. The earlier version of the 1450XLD with the shorter version of the motherboard has the PDD controller on a daughterboard, while the later 'TONG' version of the 1450XLD has it integrated. The controller hardware is comparable but incompatible between the two versions.

[74] Normally input, but some Happy 1050 software drives PA6 in output mode to directly inject index pulses.

[75] As with the 810, the 1050 encodes the drive ID in Gray code instead of binary.

[76] Note that the SIO data lines are named from the computer side, so the SIO data input line is an output for the 810.

## Supported disk types

The PDD primarily supports single density (90K) and enhanced density (130K) disk types. The hardware is also capable of double density (180K) and double-sided, double density (360K) disks, but controller support is lacking. The 1450XLD PDD controller has no support for double density disks and will not successfully detect or read them. However, it does support representing side 2 as D2:. This includes formatting each side, which must be done separately on D1: and D2:.

The TONG controller does not support representing a double-sided disk as two drives, but it does support double-sided and DSDD operation. For a double-sided disk, the second side is mapped with reversed tracks but forward sector order, so sector 721 is mapped to track 39, side 2, sector 1 and sector 738 is mapped to track 39, side 2, sector 2.

There is an unfortunate incompatibility with most other double density drives in that the TONG controller reads and writes the 128 bytes of boot sectors in the last 128 bytes of a 256 byte sector instead of the first, preventing it from booting most double density disks.

## Command set

The 1450XLD controller only supports the basic official 1050 command set of format ($21), format medium ($22), read sector ($52), read status ($53), put sector ($50), and write sector ($57). It does not support the PERCOM block commands or any diagnostic commands.

The TONG controller additionally supports several custom commands to set density, format with current density, and run diagnostic tests. Unfortunately, it also does not support PERCOM block commands, and therefore is not usable with most double-density capable DOSes.

## Format current ($20)

While the $21 command formats single density and $22 formats enhanced density, $20 formats with the current density setting. DSDD is the only other possible format, since the controller does not have separate DD and DSDD settings.

## Set density ($43 / 'C')

The 'C' command changes the density setting of the drive. AUX1 chooses the density using a similar bit layout as drive status, where $00 selects single density, $80 selects enhanced density, and $E0 selects DSDD. These values must be used exactly, not just bits 5 and 7.

## Read memory ($54 / 'T')

The 'T' command reads the contents of the sector buffer. 256 bytes are always returned regardless of the current density setting.

## Diagnostics ($23)

The $23 command initiates special testing / burn-in procedures.

## Communication protocol

As the PDD is a parallel bus device instead of an SIO device, it transfers sectors to and from the computer much faster than most disk drives. The transfer protocol requires handshaking and is relatively slow for a parallel device, much slower than most PBI or cartridge based IDE or SCSI devices. However, it's still faster than even

SIO divisor 0 transfers and can keep up with fast disk interleaves used by other drives, such as 5:1. The PDD does not buffer tracks and so it will still blow revs if it cannot keep up, particularly on a 1:1 interleave.

## PBI firmware features

The PBI handler firmware for the PDD displays a boot screen if no disk is in the drive at boot time, or more precisely, the boot-time read status command. This screen offers the ability to bypass the disk boot to access BASIC or the self-test, since otherwise this would be difficult (the internal disk drive cannot be disabled).

Holding down the SELECT button on boot will activate slow disk access, where the handler artificially limits disk read speed to vaguely approximate 1050 speeds. This is done by waiting for a minimum delay based on VCOUNT, so it only affects reads that are faster than normal and not disks using the standard 9:1 (SD) / 13:1 (ED) interleave.

