## 10.19 US Doubler

The US Doubler is a hardware modification to the 1050 drive that adds high-speed and double density support. It consists of a replacement 4K firmware and an additional 128 bytes of memory.

## Hardware changes

The only hardware change made by the US Doubler is to add another 128 bytes of memory next to the RIOT registers, canonically addressed at $0200-027F and mirrored at $0300-037F. This increases the total memory to 384 bytes and allows use of 256 byte sectors without convoluted programming tricks.

Known official firmware is CRC32 605B7153, marked as © 1985 ICD, Inc. US Doubler rev. L on the chip. 78

## High-speed operation

Communication with the US Doubler can be run at high-speed to greatly decrease loading times. The first step is to query the drive's high-speed index with command $3F, which returns a single-byte data frame with the POKEY divisor, which is always $0A for the US Doubler. Sending a command at this high speed then causes the drive to use this speed for all communications for that command.

The firmware is only capable of receiving commands at one speed at a time, so it handles speed switching by toggling high-speed for the command frame receive whenever a command frame receive error occurs. This

[78] https://atariage.com/forums/topic/156462-1050-roms/?do=findComment&comment=4116994

means that the drive ignores the first command sent after a speed switch and relies on the computer to retry the command without a response.

Since the US Doubler lacks a track buffer, effective high-speed operation depends on the disk being formatted with a suitable high-speed skew. Using high-speed communication with a disk formatted with standard sector order doesn't give an improvement. Similarly, using standard speed with a high-speed skew formatted disk gives bad read performance.

## Format skewed command ($66)

By default, the US Doubler uses a standard speed skew for the $21 and $22 format commands. For high-speed operation, it is necessary to format disks with a high-speed sector skew instead. This is done with command $66. This command is a write command that takes a 128 byte data frame containing the PERCOM block parameters in the first 12 bytes, followed by the sector list. The sector list contains 1-based sector numbers.

The format skewed command is flexible with its support of PERCOM block parameters. In particular, custom track and sector per track counts are supported, allowing partial disk formatting and missing/duplicated sectors.

## Write PERCOM block command ($4E)

PERCOM blocks set using command $4E are partially parsed by the US Doubler. Bytes 0 (track count), 3 (sectors per track), 5 (density), and 7 (bytes per sector low) are used; all other bytes are ignored.

