## 10.2 Basic protocol

All disk drives support a common set of commands, the commands supported by the original 810 disk drive. These commands can be used to access any disk of up to 65,535 sectors of 128 bytes each, for a maximum of 8MB.

## Common command conventions

All disk commands are sent to the drive using a standard SIO command frame at 19,200 baud, and follow the usual conventions for ACK/NAK/Complete/Error.

Error conditions that can be detected from the command itself, like an attempt to read a sector with an invalid sector number, cause the command frame to be NAKed. On the other hand, error conditions only determined after an access to the disk are instead returned as an Error response, after the command frame is ACKed and possibly a data frame sent from the computer.

Drives differ on treatment of data frames that are received with invalid checksums. Some drives NAK the data frame, while others simply abort the command without sending a response.

The operation timeout for disk drive commands is typically $0F, or about 15 seconds. Most operations complete much more quickly, but this time accommodates the drive spinning up, seeking to the desired track, possibly performing multiple retries to read or write the sector, and then returning the result. The exception is the format command, which requires a much longer timeout specified in the Status command.

## Status ($53)

The status ('S' = $53) command is used to query the status of the disk drive. AUX1 and AUX2 in the command frame are ignored. In response, the drive sends back a four byte status block.

|   Byte | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|--------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|     +0 | Drive status • D7 = 1: Enhanced density (1040 sectors x 128 bytes) • D6 = 1: Double sided • D5 = 1: Double density (256 byte sectors) • D4 = 1: Motor running • D3 = 1: Failed due to write protected disk • D2 = 1: Unsuccessful PUT operation • D1 = 1: Last data frame received unsuccessfully • D0 = 1: Last command frame received unsuccessfully |
|     +1 | Inverted floppy drive controller (FDC) status • Bit 7 = 0: Drive not ready • Bit 6 = 0: Write protect error • Bit 5 = 0: Deleted sector • Bit 4 = 0: Record not found (missing sector) • Bit 3 = 0: CRC error • Bit 2 = 0: Lost data • Bit 1 = 0: Data request pending • Bit 0 = 0: Busy                                                               |
|     +2 | Format timeout, in units of 64 vblanks • $E0 (224) = 4 minutes (NTSC) or 4.8 minutes (PAL)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Table 44: Disk drive status frame

|   Byte | Description                                           |
|--------|-------------------------------------------------------|
|        | • $FE (254) = 4.5 minutes (NTSC) or 5.4 minutes (PAL) |
|     +3 | Unused (usually $00)                                  |

Of the drive status bits, bits 7 and 5 are well supported among drives that support enhanced and double density operation, but bit 6 for double sided is less well supported. Percom drives do not set it even when configured for double-sided operation, while the XF551 will conservatively set this bit when detecting any double density disk, and the 815 always sets it despite not supporting double-sided operation. The TOMS Turbo Drive sets bit 6 when reading a 512 byte/sector disk.

The second byte normally reflects the type II status from the FDC after the last read/write command. Most drives return inverted FDC status similarly to the 810 or 1050 for compatibility, but there are significant variances due to differences in both hardware and firmware:

- 810-class drives using the 1771 FDC return two data record type bits in bits 5 and 6, while other drives using the 1770/1772 or 179x/279x FDCs return only the most significant record type bit in bit 5.
- Drives sometimes differ in statuses returned for specific cases, such as a write to a write protected disk, or reads that fail with missing sector related errors.
- A few drives return uninverted status instead of inverted status.

The third byte suggests the timeout used for format commands. This is needed since a format disk operation takes much longer than other disk operations and needs a longer timeout, but using such a long timeout for regular disk commands would cause unacceptably long retry times for communication failures. The stock OS uses a value of $0F (16-19 seconds) for regular disk commands. Most disk drives use format timeout values of $E0 or above, which sets a timeout of at least four minutes.

## Warning

Some PC-based disk drive emulators connected via an SIO2PC interface return an abnormally low timeout value of $03 when queried by a Status command, because they process Format commands much faster than a normal disk drive. This causes timeout problems when real disk drives are also connected to the SIO bus since some versions of DOS reuse the timeout returned by D1: when trying to format disks on other connected disk drives that require a normal format timeout.

For this reason, returning a timeout lower than $E0 in disk drive status responses is not recommended regardless of the speed of the device.

## Read ($52)

The read ('R' = $52) command reads a sector from the disk. The AUX1 and AUX2 bytes of the command frame hold the LSB and MSB, respectively, of the sector to read. On completion, the drive returns the sector data, with the size determined by the format of the disk and whether the requested sector is a boot sector. This occurs even in the event of a read error.

On most drives, an attempt to read a sector with an invalid sector number - outside of 1-720 for a single density disk - will result in the command being immediately NAKed. There are drives that will accept sector 0, however, and the read sector command is also sometimes overloaded for memory access.

## Put ($50)

The put ('P' = $50) command writes a sector to the disk, without verification. The AUX1 and AUX2 bytes of the

command frame hold the LSB and MSB, respectively, of the sector to read, and sector data is sent by the computer following acknowledgment of the command frame. The size of the sector data depends on the format of the disk and whether the requested sector is a boot sector.

On most drives, an attempt to write a sector with an invalid sector number - outside of 1-720 for a single density disk - will result in the command being immediately NAKed. There are drives that will accept sector 0, however, and the put sector command is also sometimes overloaded for memory access.

## Write ($57)

The write command ('W' = $57) command is the same as the put command, except that it also re-reads the sector afterward to verify a successful write. This requires another revolution on the disk (208ms), and thus significantly slows down the write operation compared to a Put command.

On most drives, an attempt to write a sector with an invalid sector number - outside of 1-720 for a single density disk - will result in the command being immediately NAKed. There are drives that will accept sector 0, however, and the write sector command is also sometimes overloaded for memory access.

## Format ($21)

The format command ('!' = $21) command formats a disk, writing 40 tracks and then verifying all sectors. All sectors are fill with the data byte $00. On completion, the drive returns a sector-sized buffer containing a list of 16-bit bad sector numbers, terminated by $FFFF.

Because the format command takes much longer than other disk commands, it also requires a longer timeout. The status command returns the timeout required for a format operation, in multiples of 64 frames.

## Note

Rev. 7.7 XF551s will continually format the disk in a loop when sent a format command with AUX1=$10 and AUX2=$50. It is recommended that both AUX bytes be set to $00 when invoking format commands.

