## 10.20 Super Archiver

The Super Archiver from Computer Software Services (CSS) adds 2K of RAM and modified firmware to a 1050, extending its capabilities.

## Opening the Super Archiver

Most of the Super Archiver's capabilities are locked behind an Open command which must be sent to the drive with a specific 16-bit, four-digit hex code which is hardcoded in the firmware. This is primarily meant as a hiding mechanism, to prevent programs from detecting the Super Archiver when not intended by the user. A common unlock code is ABCD.

## Memory map

The Super Archiver does not replace the 6507 CPU, so it is still restricted to an 8K address space.

Table 72: Super Archiver memory map

<!-- image -->

| Address range   | Mapping                               |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------|
| $1800-1FFF      | 2K ROM read window + RAM write window |
| $1000-17FF      | 2K RAM                                |
| $0800-0FFF      | Mirror of $0000-07FF                  |
| $0400-07FF      | 279X FDC                              |
| $0380-03FF      | RIOT registers (mirror)               |
| $0300-037F      | Not mapped                            |
| $0280-02FF      | RIOT registers                        |
| $0200-027F      | Not mapped                            |
| $0180-01FF      | RIOT RAM                              |
| $0100-017F      | 6810 RAM (mirror)                     |
| $0080-00FF      | RIOT RAM (mirror)                     |
| $0000-007F      | 6810 RAM                              |

The firmware mapping is unusual, as the 4K firmware ROM normally mapped to $1000-1FFF is instead bank switched into a 2K window at $1800-1FFF. The RAM is enabled for writes over all of $1000-1FFF, so writing to the ROM window will actually modify RAM. ROM banks are switched by RIOT port A bit 2.

## Firmware versions

There is one known official version of the Super Archiver firmware, a 4K image with a CRC32 of [7E53BEFA]. This firmware has an unlock code of ABCD and is identified by diagnostics as version 1.6.

## Slow speed

The Super Archiver can slow down the rotational speed of the drive mechanism under firmware control. This is done by lowering RIOT port B bit 1, slowing down the spindle motor from 288 RPM to ~270 RPM.

## Bit-Writer

The Bit-Writer or BitWriter is an add-on to the Super Archiver that extends its capabilities, adding support for writing raw bit patterns that the FDC is unable to write. It adds another 8K of RAM, a PIA, and an automatic shift register. Table 73 shows the modified memory map.

Table 73: Super Archiver memory map with Bit-Writer

<!-- image -->

| Address range   | Mapping                               |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------|
| $1800-1FFF      | 2K ROM read window + RAM write window |
| $1000-17FF      | 2K RAM                                |
| $0800-0FFF      | Mirror of $0000-07FF                  |
| $0400-07FF      | 279X FDC                              |
| $0380-03FF      | RIOT registers (mirror)               |
| $0300-037F      | Not mapped                            |
| $0280-02FF      | RIOT registers                        |
| $0200-027F      | Bit-Writer PIA                        |
| $0180-01FF      | RIOT RAM                              |
| $0100-017F      | 6810 RAM (mirror)                     |
| $0080-00FF      | RIOT RAM (mirror)                     |
| $0000-007F      | 6810 RAM                              |

The PIA is mapped to $0200-027F with its address lines swapped like the main computer; the order of its registers is port A, port B, port A control, port B control. Table 74 shows the PIA connections.

| Port signal   | Direction   | Connection                                     |
|---------------|-------------|------------------------------------------------|
| PA0-PA7       | I/O         | RAM data port                                  |
| PB7           | I           | RAMA12 sense                                   |
| PB6           | I           | RAMA11 sense                                   |
| PB5           | I           | RAMA10 sense                                   |
| PB4           | O           | Address decrement clock (rising edge)          |
| PB3           | O           | Write enable (0 = enabled)                     |
| PB2           | O           | Autoincrement shift clock enable (1 = enabled) |
| PB1           | O           | RAM address clear (1 = clear)                  |
| PB0           | O           | RAM write enable (0 = enabled)                 |
| CA1           | I           | RAMA9 sense                                    |
| CA2           | O           | 275 RPM SLOW2 speed (0 = enable)               |
| CB1           | I           | Not connected                                  |
| CB2           | O           | 282 RPM SLOW1 speed (0 = enable)               |
| /IRQA/B       | O           | Not connected                                  |

Table 74: Bit-Writer PIA connections

## Bit-Writer memory access

Unlike the main memory, the Bit-Writer's memory is not directly addressable. Instead, the PIA's port A is connected to the RAM data bus, and port B is used to control the address counter. The address counter can either count down on a word basis or up on a bit basis.

RAM access usually starts by momentarily setting PB1 to clear the address counter. After that, bits A1-A12 can be manually decremented by toggling PB4, with the address counter decrementing by two bytes on the rising edge of PB4. Each new byte will automatically appear on port A if it is configured for input. Configuring port A for output and momentarily lowering PB0 will instead write to RAM.

As PB4 only clocks the counter for address bits A1-A12, it can only be used to access half of the Bit-Writer's memory. Accessing the full 8K requires using PB2 instead, which serves double-duty as both the automatic shift clock enable when writing (PB3=0) and a manual shift clock when accessing the RAM with writing disabled (PB3=1). Each rising edge of PB2 advances the counter by one bit, so it must be toggled 16 times to advance the address counter by one byte.

## Bit-Writer raw track writes

The main use of the Bit-Writer is to write arbitrary data patterns to disk that the FDC is not able to write. This is done by setting PB3=0 and PB2=1, which enables the write gate on the drive mechanism and turns on the automatic shift clock. The Bit-Writer will then begin shifting out data from its 8K RAM to the drive mechanism at a rate of one bit cell every 4μs, reading from ascending addresses. Unlike the FDC's Write Track command, there are no limitations on data or clock bits that can be written, the write does not have to be aligned to the index, and the CPU does not have to do anything during the transfer.

The data in RAM must be preconverted to FM with clock bits interleaved with data bits, requiring two raw bytes for each data byte. Additionally, since bits are shifted out LSB-first while data is stored on disk MSB-first, data bytes must be bit-reversed in addition to being expanded with clock bits. Only single density is supported, as there is neither an option for the 2μs clock that would be necessary for double density, nor is there enough RAM. A full track in FM already takes about 6.5-7K of the 8K available memory depending on the rotation speed used.

By default, the Bit-Writer will continue to shift bits out to the disk forever as long as writing is enabled. To determine when the track data has been written, the highest four address bits can be sensed through PB5-PB7 and CA1. As CA1 can only detect edge transitions, this requires aligning the end of the track data to a 512 byte boundary.

## Bit-Writer raw track reads

There is no support for raw reads in the Bit-Writer hardware. Raw track reads must be done the same way as on the stock hardware, by using FDC read sector/address/track commands. The Bit-Writer's additional memory can be used to buffer the track data, however.

## Bit-Writer spindle speed control

The Bit-Writer augments the 270 RPM slow speed option of the Super Archiver with two additional intermediate speed options. These are called SLOW1 and SLOW2 by the diagnostics software, with the existing Super Archiver slow speed being renamed SLOW3. Lowering CB2 on the PIA activates SLOW1 at 282 RPM and lowering CA2 on the PIA activates SLOW2 at 275 RPM. Only one of the slow speed signals is activated at a time.

