## 10.21 Happy 1050

The Happy 1050 adds a 6502 CPU, 6K of RAM, and an additional 4K of ROM to the 1050. Additional features include track buffering, custom code upload, and high-speed operation. It is, however, not compatible with the Happy 810 as the two use different command sets and require different code uploads.

## Memory map

The Happy 1050 replaces the 6507 with a 6502, expanding the address space from 8K to 64K.

Table 75: Happy 1050 Memory Map

<!-- image -->

The bottom 4K of address space at $0000-0FFF is the same as the stock 1050 hardware. The 1050 ROM is removed and A12 is re-routed to A15, mirroring the 6810, RIOT, and FDC throughout the lower 32K ($00007FFF).

The base 256 bytes of RAM is augmented by additional RAM at $8000-9FFF. Early boards used multiple 2K chips for 2K and 6K configurations; later boards use a single 8K chip, of which the last 2K is available but unused by the firmware.

The firmware is expanded to 8K in the Happy 1050. Unusually, it is split into two banks of 4K despite 8K of address space being available - the 4K bank is mirrored twice at $E000-FFFF and bank switching is required. Banks are switched by accesses to $FFF8 or $FFF9 for each bank, respectively, or the mirrors ($2FFx, $3FFx, $6FFx, $7FFx, $AFFx, $BFFx, or $EFFx).

Two official revisions of the firmware are known to exist, both 8K in size. Revision 1 has a CRC32 of 19B6BFE5, while revision 2's CRC32 is F76EAE16. The self-test command code indicates that rev. 1 is based on rev. K of the 1050 code, while rev. 2 adopts the FDC compatibility changes from 1050 rev. L.

$4000-7FFF, $9800-9FFF, and $B800-BFFF are regions that have behaviors related to the Happy Controller option board, if present, in addition to their usual read/write behaviors. Their functions are described later below.

## Contended regions

Several memory address regions in the Happy 1050 are improperly decoded and activate both the ROM and another device. This causes bus contention where both the ROM and the other device attempt to drive the data bus at the same time, resulting in a combination of the two values.

$2000-3FFF and $6000-7FFF contain conflicting regions between the 1050 hardware and the ROM. Where the 6810, RIOT, or FDC are present, the result is a possibly unstable combination of the read values from that chip and the ROM. On an HE1050D rev. C board, this generally returned the bitwise AND of the values, at least in the 6810 region.

$A000-BFFF is a mirrored region that should conflict between the RAM and the ROM, but in practice seems to return RAM.

## Memory read/write commands

As with the Happy 810, the read and write sector commands have been extended to allow memory access. A sector address with bit 15 set reads or writes to that address on the drive. Unlike the Happy 810, both put/write commands work and the start address can be anywhere in $8000-FFFF, not just in RAM. Also, the transfer size depends on the current density setting, so 256 bytes are transferred if the current drive setting is double density.

## High speed commands

The built-in firmware supports high-speed versions of the read, write, and put sector commands as $72, $77, and $70, respectively. The command frame and command ACK/NAK are sent at low speed, while the completion/error and data frame are sent at 38,400 baud ($10 divisor).

Revision 2 firmware is also capable of using US Doubler compatible high speed protocols. Like the US Doubler, it uses a POKEY divisor of $0A. Unlike other drives using this protocol, support for this is not enabled until the Get High Speed Index ($3F) command is received, upon which the firmware enables the USD-compatible high speed code.

## USD high-speed corruption bug

The revision 2 support for US Doubler style high speed has a critical bug: in the default power-up configuration, all high speed write sector commands will corrupt the third byte of the written sector. This is due to the USD high speed single-byte transmit routine stomping part of the sector staging buffer at memory location $0002 and its mirror $0102 prior to writing the sector. A typical value is $82, left over from shifting out $41 (ACK).

Enabling write buffering bypasses the problem. However, this is disabled by default, making the drive dangerous to use with a high-speed OS that does not have a workaround. SpartaDOS X is one of the DOSes that avoids this issue, by enabling write buffering when detecting the Happy 1050 in its startup disk drive scan.

## Track read buffering

By default, the Happy 1050 has track read buffering enabled to speed up read operations. Instead of reading each sector as requested by the computer, the drive reads all sectors on a track in the order stored on disk, and then uses the buffer to satisfy read sector commands without issuing commands to the floppy disk controller. This greatly reduces rotational delays and speeds up sequential reads on a single density disk by about 25%. It is even possible for the drive to idle the disk mechanism and stop the motors while still responding to read sector commands, as long as the requested sectors are all in the buffer.

Whenever a sector is requested on a track not in the buffer, the firmware seeks to and reads the new track. It first issues a Read Address command to read the sector ID of the next sector on the disk, and then begins reading sectors into the buffer after that. Buffering a track thus takes slightly more than a revolution.

In order to do this, the firmware needs to know the sector order beforehand, since the 2793/7 is unable to read an unspecified sector - it can only read the sector address of the next sector or read the data of a specific sector. The firmware works around this by scanning and recording the sector order from track 0 via Read Address commands when a new disk is inserted, which is then used for all tracks. The firmware detects a disk change by polling for changes in the state of the Not Ready status bit on the FDC, which is connected to the 1050's drive lever. It can only do so when the drive is idle, however, so it is possible for a disk change to be missed if the change occurs very quickly while a command is being processed.

Track read buffering is automatically disabled if the Controller is present and the Fast/Slow switch is set to Slow. It can be re-enabled on the fly by changing the switch back to Fast, upon which the firmware will re-scan the sector order and resume buffered reads.

## Track read buffering error handling

Track read buffering supports most types of sector errors, caching the FDC error code along with each sector read. The main exception is duplicate/phantom sectors, which cannot be supported in the track buffer; only one of the sectors is cached.

As errors may also occur transiently, the track buffering logic attempts to re-read sectors that were not read successfully. This is done in entire passes over the track. For instance, if all sectors but 2, 3, and 7 read correctly, the firmware will then attempt to read only those three sectors on the next pass. The exception is deleted sectors, which are considered successful reads and are not re-read. This process continues over and over as long as unsuccessful sectors remain, with a quick double half step head reposition after two passes, until an ultimate timeout of about six seconds.

The firmware tracks the last sector read and will pass back buffered errors whenever a new sector is requested. If a sector is re-read, however, it will activate the disk mechanism for another pass at re-reading all remaining errored sectors on the currently read buffered track. Unfortunately, for a permanent sector error, this re-read pass continually runs until the track buffering read timeout expires. The result is that any sector with a permanent error takes a full six seconds to read when track buffering is enabled. This is substantially longer than a stock 1050 drive, which only takes about half a second to complete all retries for most types of read errors.

## Sector 1 buffering

When track buffering is enabled, the firmware also maintains a special side cache for track 0, sector 1, independently of the normal track buffering cache. This allows the drive to service requests for sector 1 without invalidating the track buffer and re-reading all of track 0. In particular, this speeds up accesses by SpartaDOS, which frequently re-reads sector 1 to check if the disk volume has been changed.

## Writes with read-only track buffering

By default, track buffering is enabled only for reads. The firmware uses a write-through strategy for writes where writes always go to the disk, but will also update the track buffer if the written sector is cached. This applies both the track buffer and the sector 1 cache. For instance, when alternating writes and reads of sector 2, only write commands will occur on the disk as the writes will update the track buffer and reads will be serviced from the track buffer. Similarly, writing and reading sector 1 will write to the disk and update the cache, then read from the cache.

Writes never flush or reallocate the track buffer in this mode, and thus reads buffered on one track can be interleaved with writes to another track even when a single track buffer is used. Thus, the drive can service reads from a buffered track 0 interleaved with writes to sectors in other tracks without re-reading track 0.

## Track write buffering

The Happy 1050 has the ability to buffer writes as well as reads. This option is disabled by default and only enabled by command, or by powering on the drive with the option switch set to Slow and changing it to Fast. Up to an entire track can be buffered, which is then written out in a single rotation to disk after enough time has passed or the buffer needs to be reused for another track. This speeds up writes similarly to reads. Both write and put commands are cached by the write buffer.

When a write sector command is issued for a different track, new track is not immediately read into the track buffer; only the written sector is stored and all other sector slots in the track buffer are invalidated. This avoids unnecessary sector reads for sectors that will be overwritten. The track buffer remains sparse until either the track is flushed to disk or a read occurs. If a read occurs, a full track read occurs and the missing slots in the track buffer are filled in. This occurs even if the sector that is read is already resident in the track buffer as pending for write.

The write buffer is also automatically flushed on any recognized command that is not a read, write, or put sector command or the Happy command ($48). This includes even the Status command. All modified sectors in the write buffer and written back to the disk before the command is executed. However, the track buffer is not flushed entirely and still remains valid for reads.

When writing modified sectors back to disk, the drive first does a Read Address command to determine the current position of the head in sector order, and then begins writing modified sectors starting with the next sector. As long as the disk has a consistent sector order between all tracks, this allows the drive to write all sectors in a single revolution regardless of sector interleave. A verify pass is always done afterward by re-reading the sectors, regardless of whether the sectors were written with a write or put sector command. Only sectors that were written are re-read.

The sector 1 buffer is write-through even when track write buffering is enabled and cannot handle sector 1 writes by itself. If the write buffer is not currently holding track 0, writing to sector 1 will cause the write buffer to be flushed and reassigned to track 0. However, once track 0 is write buffered, any writes to sector 1 will also be written to the sector 1 buffer, where it can be re-read without reassigning the track read buffer.

In some cases, the write-allocate behavior when write buffering is enabled can be slower than read-only buffering when interleaving reads and writes to different tracks. For instance, with an alternating pattern of reading sector 4 and writing sector 19 on a double density disk in read-only buffered mode, the drive will read

track 0 once into the track buffer, then use it to service the reads while writing sector 19 to disk each time with no additional seeks. However, if write buffering is enabled, each write will flush and reallocate the track buffer to track 1, forcing track 0 to be re-read each time for the following read, seeking back and forth between tracks 0 and 1.

## Track read/write buffering

In single density with 6K of RAM, the Happy 1050 is capable of buffering different two tracks for read and write. This mitigates the poor behavior that sometimes occurs with write buffering and only one track buffer, as the drive can then read from one track while writing to the other without seeking or flushing the track buffers in between.

When two track buffers are used, one of the track buffers is dedicated to reads and the other to writes. It is not possible to buffer two tracks both for read or write. If a sector is not already cached in the track read buffer, writing to it and re-reading it will still require invalidating and re-reading the track into the track read buffer, including the sector that is pending write. The firmware does ensure that reads from sectors that are pending write come from the track write buffer to ensure consistency, but it is unfortunately unable to do this unless the sector is also in the track read buffer, which is suboptimal.

For enhanced and double density disks, the firmware drops to single track buffering as there is not enough memory for two track buffers - it would require 6.5K and 9K, respectively. The 8K configurations technically do have enough RAM in enhanced density, but the firmware is not able to take advantage of it.

## 1050 diagnostic commands (rev. 1 only)

Revision 1 firmware supports the $23 and $24 1050 diagnostic commands. These commands were removed and will return a NAK on rev. 2 firmware.

## Quiet command

Command $51 ('Q') turns off the drive motors immediately. AUX1/2 are ignored. As with other non-sector commands, the Quiet command flushes buffered write data back to the disk before turning off the motors.

## Happy command

Command $48 ('H') is a command with multiple functions, multiplexed by AUX1.

All sub-commands flush track buffers before performing their function.

## Warning

Command $48 invalidates the write buffer without writing modified sectors back to disk, so any modified sectors still left in the track write buffer are lost! This can result in disk corruption. It can be avoided by sending a status command ($53) first to initiate a write-back for any modified sectors.

## Set idle timeout (AUX1=$01)

Sub-command $01 sets the inactivity timeout for the drive. AUX2 sets the timeout in units of about 50ms.

## Set alternate device ID (AUX1=$02)

Sub-command $02 changes the alternate device ID for the drive. Bits 0-6 of AUX2 set the alternate device ID, while bit 7 determines whether the drive only responds to the alternate ID. For instance, for a drive normally

configured for D1: by hardware switches, $34 would map it to both D1: and D4:, and $B4 would map the drive to D4: only. In the latter case, the drive would no longer respond to D1:.

The change to the device ID does not take place immediately, but is instead queued for the next disk change.

## Reinitialize drive (AUX1=$03)

Sub-command $03 reinitializes the drive by performing a software reset. The Complete byte is actually sent before the reset instead of after, as the drive forgets all state when the reset occurs; this means that the drive will be uncommunicative for a short time afterward.

## Configure drive (AUX1=$04-FF)

Sub-commands $04-FF reconfigure the Happy-specific functionality of the drive. The bits in AUX1 determine the mode bits to change, while the bits in AUX2 are the new states for those mode bits. Table 76 lists the functions of the individual mode bits.

Table 76: Happy 1050 drive mode bits

<!-- image -->

| Bit         | Function (if set)                             |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Bit 7 ($80) | Unhappy mode (disable all extended functions) |
| Bit 6 ($40) | Disable track read/write buffering            |
| Bit 5 ($20) | Disable track write buffering                 |
| Bit 4 ($10) | Force write protected                         |
| Bit 3 ($08) | Force write enabled                           |
| Bit 2 ($04) | Enables alternate device ID                   |

Thus, AUX1=$80, AUX2=$80 would set Unhappy Mode, while AUX1=$58, AUX2=$40 would disable track buffering and restore normal write protect sensing.

If mode bits 3 and 4 are set at the same time, the write protect state is sensed normally, the same as if both functions were disabled.

Changes to all but the track buffering modes - bits 2-4 and 7 - take effect immediately. Track buffering and write buffering can be disabled immediately, but read buffering can only be enabled if it has already been initialized, and write buffering cannot be enabled immediately; otherwise, these changes take effect on the next disk change.

## Fast/slow switch

Two hardware switches are added to drives that have the Controller Option. The fast/slow switch is used to toggle the track buffering feature of the drive, which speeds up disk access but is incompatible with some disks. Powering up the drive with the switch set to Fast mode provides the standard behavior of using read-only track buffering. When it is set to Slow, then track buffering is disabled, though other Happy functions are still enabled. Changing it from Slow to Fast not only re-enables track buffering, but also enables track write buffering.

The mechanism for the firmware to read this switch is odd. When this switch is set to the Slow setting, accesses to $9800-9FFF or $B800-BFFF toggle a flip-flop that is connected to the Set Overflow line on the controller 6502. This means that every other access sets the V flag on the CPU. If the switch is set to Fast or the Controller is not present, these accesses are ignored. There is no preset state for this flip-flop and thus the firmware must always issue at least two accesses.

## Write protect switch

The second switch on the Controller is a three-way switch to control the write protect setting on the disk. The three settings are Normal, Protect, and Write.

In the Normal setting, the write protect sensor of the drive mechanism is modified by an inversion flip-flop before being passed to the FDC. An access to $4000-7FFF toggles the flip-flop, switching between inverting and not inverting the state of the sensor. An access to the fast/slow switch ranges ($9800-9FFF and $B800-BFFF) clears this flip-flop, restoring normal non-inverted sensing. There is no way to directly set the flip-flop, but the firmware can achieve any required configuration by a combination of clear/toggle accesses and checking the FDC's write protect state.

In the Protect and Write settings, the Write Protect state seen by the FDC is overridden to either always on or off, regardless of the disk and flip-flop state. The firmware can still clear or toggle the flip-flop, but cannot affect the WP signal. It is therefore not possible for the firmware to write to the disk when the switch is set to Protect.

