## 10.23 XF551 disk drive

The XF551 disk drive adds true support for double-density disks, with 720 sectors of 256 bytes each. It also spins the disk at 300 RPM instead of 288 RPM, resulting in slightly lower rotational latencies.

## High speed transfers

The high bit of a command byte can be set to request high speed transfers. When this is set, the initial command frame ACK/NAK byte is sent by the XF551 at 19,200 baud, and then the transmission rate between the computer and the XF551 for the remainder of the command is raised to 38,400 baud. This includes any following

data frame ACK/NAK, command Complete/Error, data frame, and checksum bytes in either direction, but it does not include the command frame itself which must always be sent at standard speed. Any command may be executed in high speed except for disk format commands, including Status.

## Status command

The status command ($53) returns additional status on the XF551. The first byte indicates the following:

Table 79: XF551 drive status flags

<!-- image -->

| Bit   | Description                                        |
|-------|----------------------------------------------------|
| Bit 7 | 0 = single or double density 1 = enhanced density  |
| Bit 6 | 1 = double sided                                   |
| Bit 5 | 0 = single or enhanced density 1 = double density  |
| Bit 4 | Always 0                                           |
| Bit 3 | 1 = last put operation failed due to write protect |
| Bit 2 | 1 = last put operation failed                      |
| Bit 1 | 1 = receive error on last data frame               |
| Bit 0 | 1 = receive error on last command frame            |

The XF551 does not indicate motor status via bit 4.

The timeout field in the returned status is set to $FE on the XF551 instead of $E0.

## Format command

The standard format command ($21) is extended on the XF551 to also format disks in double density and DSDD formats, depending on the current mode set by either automatic density detection or the Write PERCOM Block command. However, it will not format disks in enhanced/medium density, to preserve compatibility with the 1050; when the current density is enhanced density, command $21 will change the current mode to single density before formatting the disk.

## Format With High-Speed Skew command

Issuing the format command with the high bit set ($A1) instructs the XF551 to do a format using a sector skew better suited to high-speed transfer rates, using a 9:1 interleave instead of a 15:1 interleave. Because of the reuse of bit 7, this is not a high-speed command and the data frame is sent at low speed. The high-speed skew only pertains to double density formats and does not affect single density or enhanced density formatting.

## Format self-test

All format commands have a special mode in XF551s with rev 7.7 firmware: invoking a format command with AUX1=$10 and AUX2=$50 causes the drive to format the disk over and over in a loop. This continues forever until an error occurs, at which time the drive exits to waiting for a new command without sending a reply to the computer. Drives with rev 7.4 firmware do not have this feature.

## Read PERCOM Block command

Command $4E ('N') reads a PERCOM configuration block from the drive. This corresponds to either the last detected format or the last format selected by the Write PERCOM Block command, whichever is more recent. The XF551 always returns one of the following four configurations as an 12 byte payload:

Table 80: XF551 PERCOM configuration block values

<!-- image -->

|                   |       | Format                | Format                | Format                | Format                |
|-------------------|-------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| Data              | Index | SD                    | ED                    | SSDD                  | DSDD                  |
| Track count       | 0     | 40                    | 40                    | 40                    | 40                    |
| Step rate         | 1     | $00 (6 ms/half track) | $00 (6 ms/half track) | $00 (6 ms/half track) | $00 (6 ms/half track) |
| Sectors per track | 2-3   | 18                    | 26                    | 18                    | 18                    |
| Sides minus one   | 4     | 0                     | 0                     | 0                     | 1                     |
| Recording method  | 5     | $00 (FM)              | $04 (MFM)             | $04 (MFM)             | $04 (MFM)             |
| Bytes per sector  | 6-7   | 128                   | 128                   | 256                   | 256                   |
| Drive status      | 8     | $01 (online)          | $01 (online)          | $01 (online)          | $01 (online)          |
| Reserved byte     | 9     | $41                   | $41                   | $41                   | $41                   |
| Reserved bytes    | 10-11 | $00                   | $00                   | $00                   | $00                   |

Note that all 16-bit quantities in the PERCOM block are stored in big-endian order with the high byte first, backwards from traditional 6502 convention.

## Write PERCOM Block command

The PERCOM block can also be modified using command $4F ('O'), which receives the PERCOM block as a 12 byte payload. This is used to set the desired format for a subsequent format command. The XF551 does not validate or interpret the entire PERCOM block, however, and does the bare minimum of checks needed to distinguish its supported formats:

- If the sectors per track count is 26, extended density is selected.
- If the bytes per sector count is less than 256, single density is selected.
- If the sides minus one value is zero, single sided double density is selected.
- Otherwise, double sided double density is selected.

Track count, step rate, recording method, and drive status are always ignored.

## Double sided operation

The XF551 supports using both sides of the disk, but only in double density. When enabled, the available sector count is doubled from 1440 to 2880 sectors and logical sectors 1441-2880 are mapped to the second side.

The sectors on the second side are mapped in reverse order, both in tracks and sectors. Logical sector 720 is on track 39, side 0, sector 18; logical sector 721 is on track 39, side 1, sector 18; and logical sector 722 is on track 39, side 1, sector 17. Logical sector 1440 is on track 0, side 1, sector 1.

Access to the second side is only allowed when the second side is enabled. As the XF551 cannot detect whether a disk is double sided, it simply autodetects all double density disks as double sided.

Despite the second side being read backwards, the XF551 does not reverse the sector interleave order when formatting the second side, and thus the sector read timing is slightly different.

## Transmission timing

The XF551's 8040 CPU runs at 8.333MHz, giving a machine cycle rate of 555KHz. The transmission loop runs at a rate of 29 cycles per bit (19157 baud) and 290 cycles per byte (1915.7 bytes/second). In high-speed mode, this is accelerated to 14 cycles/bit (39683 baud) and 140 cycles/byte (3968.3 bytes/second).

## Command line timing

Most disk drives are lenient with or even ignore timing for releasing /COMMAND after the command frame is sent. The XF551 is unusually strict in this regard and will reject any command frame for which /COMMAND is not still asserted at the end of the command frame. Therefore, it is essential to wait for the last byte to finish transmitting completely before deasserting /COMMAND.

## No disk behavior

The XF551 has no latch sensor and uses a WD1772 FDC that lacks a Ready signal input, so it will repeatedly restep and retry on accesses with no disk present.

## Density switching problem

Unfortunately, the XF551 firmware has problems with reliably detecting double density disks and can sometimes fail to read such disks after a disk change. The firmware will automatically switch from FM to MFM, but defaults to enhanced (medium) density first, and relies on a long sector error to indicate when it should switch to double density. If the logical sector number of the next request maps in enhanced density to a physical sector with number greater than 18, the FDC will not be able to find a sector to read and the firmware is unable to trigger a density change on the resulting Record Not Found error.

Compounding this problem is an additional quirk in the firmware, which is that boot sectors 1-3 are exempted from the long sector check. This prevents the XF551 from switching densities properly when a double density MyDOS disk is used with SpartaDOS X, since SDX first reads sector 1 to detect the filesystem type and check for a volume change before reading the directory at sector 361; sector 1 causes a change only to ED and then attempting to read 361 causes a RNF on track 13, sector 23. Some XF551-oriented DOSes deliberately issue a dummy read to sector 4 to force a density change to double density.

## Firmware versions

There are three known stock versions of the XF551 firmware.

Table 81: XF551 firmware revisions

| Revision   | CRC32    | CRC32 (first 4K)   | Part number / label                                                                         |
|------------|----------|--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 7.4        | FC02766B | CA65EB5F           |                                                                                             |
| ?          | D438B4D9 | C9A8EC16           | C101696-002 ©ATARI 1987 RP2364 2152 38 7L3 10 C101696-002 ©ATARI 1987 RP2364 2152 38 7L3 14 |
| 7.7        | 38B97AE3 | 041F343B           | C101696-003 REV. 7.7 CHECKSUMABCF                                                           |

The checksum referred to in the 7.7 chip label is the 16-bit checksum of the firmware computed in the same way as the XL/XE OS checksum, a simple 16-bit binary sum of all bytes.

The differences between revision 7.4 and the intermediate revision between 7.4 and 7.7 are fixes to improve SIO transfer reliability, especially for PAL. Specifically, the receive loops are tweaked from 28 machine cycles/bit to 29 machine cycles/bit. This changes the sampled baud rate from 19,841 baud to 19,157 baud, increasing reliability for NTSC and especially for PAL. Revision 7.7 is thus sometimes known as the PAL fix version, even though the fixes were present prior to 7.7.

Rev 7.7 also has an additional change, which is the addition of the format self-test loop when format commands are executed with AUX1=$10 and AUX2=$50.

The firmware ROM is 8K despite only 4K being used; A12 is permanently grounded. The CRC32 values above are for the entire 8K ROM image. XF551s may also have an 8050 with the firmware stored in the internal 4K ROM. The known dump from such an 8050 chip with part number C070235 has the same contents as the lower half of the C101696-002 chip [D438B4D9].

