## 10.26 Indus GT disk drive

The Indus GT disk drive from Indus Systems, Inc. provides up to 180K of single-sided, double-density disk storage over an extended version of the SIO disk protocol. It contains a Z80A running at 4MHz with 2K of RAM.

## Firmware revisions

Two stock revisions of the Indus GT firmware are known and have been dumped. The revision numbers are stored in the firmware image and also reported by the Syncromesh and Super Synchromesh loaders.

Table 85: Indus GT stock firmware revisions

|   Version | CRC32    | Notes                                           |
|-----------|----------|-------------------------------------------------|
|       1.1 | D125CAAD | Unable to read sectors >720 in enhanced density |
|       1.2 | D8504B4A | Fixes ED and adds support for booting CP/M      |

The version 1.10 ROM is mislabeled as v1.4 or INDUS14 in some places, which is unfortunate as it is buggy and cannot read enhanced density disks properly due to a broken sector number check. There is also a "1.2X" or "1.3X" firmware that are modified versions of 1.20.

The known original versions as noted in the official Indus GT Field Service Manual are 1.00, 1.10, and 1.20. No copy of 1.00 has been found yet.

## Command set

Nine commands are supported by the built-in firmware: read sector ($52), status ($53), write sector ($57), put sector ($50), read PERCOM block ($4E), write PERCOM block ($4F), format ($21), format enhanced ($22), and execute ($58). This can be extended through uploaded code.

## Execute command ($58)

The Indus GT specific 'X' ($58) command allows arbitrary code to be uploaded and executed on the drive. This is useful both for diagnostic purposes and to extend the functionality of the drive. In particular, allows the

Table 84: Speedy XF RIOT connections

| Port   | Signal   | Direction   | Usage                               | Polarity     |
|--------|----------|-------------|-------------------------------------|--------------|
|        | PB0      | Output      | SIO data input (device to computer) | non-inverted |

Syncromesh and SuperSynchromesh extensions to add (working) high speed operation.

Bit 0 of the AUX2 byte determines whether to upload code (1) or execute it (0). When uploading code, AUX1 specifies the length of code to be transferred in bytes. The code is located in the drive's memory at 7F00h and is invoked with AUX2 bit 0 = 0. The code can perform arbitrary transfers in response to being invoked, including both receiving data (write) and sending data (read).

## Commonly uploaded code sequences

While arbitrary code can be executed on the Indus GT, there are a few standard code sequences used by software that interfaces with the Indus. Table 86 gives lengths, SIO checksums, and descriptions of the commonly uploaded code sequences.

Table 86: Commonly used Indus GT uploadable code fragments.

| Length (checksum)                          | Description                                                                                                                       |
|--------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| $19 ($52)                                  | Checks firmware version on drive. Returns a two-byte payload containing the major and minor version in BCD, i.e. $01 20 for 1.20. |
| $8A ($EB)                                  | Synchromesh loader from Indus GTSYNC.COM utility.                                                                                 |
| $67 ($49) $100 ($22) $100 ($A0) $100 ($CF) | Synchromesh firmware (SV1.20) from Indus GTSYNC.COM utility.                                                                      |
| $E5 ($45)                                  | SuperSynchromesh loader from Indus GTSYNC.COM utility.                                                                            |
| $69 ($DA) $100 ($BA) $100 ($62) $100 ($F5) | SuperSynchromesh firmware (SV1.30) from Indus GTSYNC.COM utility.                                                                 |
| $F5 ($A4) $100 ($EE) $100 ($96)            | RamCharger firmware from Indus GTSYNC.COM utility.                                                                                |
| $E5 ($F0)                                  | SuperSynchromesh loader from SpartaDOS X INDUS.SYS.                                                                               |
| $69 ($6E) $100 ($BA) $100 ($62) $100 ($F5) | SuperSynchromesh firmware (SV1.30 patched) from SpartaDOS X INDUS.SYS.                                                            |

The loaders are invoked repeatedly using the execute mode of the $58 command, supplying blocks of code each time. The short block is given first, but the blocks are arranged in ascending address order. No length is specified in AUX1 for each block and the loader and uploader must be matched. At the end of a firmware upload, an additional execute call is made with no length to finalize the upload.

## High-speed operation

Synchromesh is the name of the Indus GT's high speed operation at 38,400 baud. It is very similar to but not exactly the same as the XF551's high speed operation. Bit 7 is set on a command to indicate that the data phase should be performed at high speed. As with the XF551, the command frame itself and the command ACK occur at low speed (19,200 baud), but the data frame ACK/Complete/Error bytes, data payload, and checksum are transferred at high speed.

The original version of Synchromesh on the drive uses the clock in/out signals from the computer to control send and receive timing on the drive. For these reasons, receive operations must always synchronous mode instead of asynchronous mode with the original version of Synchromesh. This doesn't apply to standard speed communication as the firmware synchronizes to the leading edge of the start bit in that case. The updated

version of Synchromesh uploaded to the drive by GTSYNC.COM also uses conventional timing methods for high-speed operation and thus requires the usual asynchronous receive mode on POKEY.

SuperSynchromesh increases the transfer speed to 69,000 baud, equivalent to POKEY's divisor 6.

## High-speed format commands

The stock firmware on the drive supports high-speed versions of the format commands, but they simply transfer the final sector list in high-speed - no change is made to the sector skew. All disks are formatted with even and odd sectors partitioned, giving a 9:1 interleave in SD/DD and 13:1 for ED.

The uploaded versions of Synchromesh revise the $A1 command to use more appropriate interleaves for highspeed operation. Synchromesh uses 6:1 interleave for SD and 9:1 for DD, while SuperSynchromesh uses 5:1 for SD and 7:1 for DD.

Also added with the firmware update is $A3, which reformats only the boot tracks of a disk with standard, nonhigh-speed appropriate interleaves. The first three tracks are formatted on SD, while the first two tracks are formatted on DD. There is no corresponding low-speed $23 command.

$A2 is not supported by the updated firmware, and neither the $A1 nor the $A3 commands can format ED disks.

## Caution

The Indus GT and XF551 are incompatible with respect to the $A1 and $A2 format commands. The $A1 format command sends a low-speed data frame on the XF551, while on the Indus GT it sends a highspeed data frame. The $A2 command has the same behavior on the stock firmware and is not supported at all by the uploaded Synchromesh or SuperSynchromesh firmware.

## TOMS Turbo Drive

The TOMS Turbo Drive is a clone of the Indus GT that is compatible hardware-wise, but uses different firmware. It is unique for using the SIO CLOCK OUT signal for bit timing when receiving data frames from the computer, which most drives either can't or don't do, and won't work if this signal is not sent from the computer.

The firmware for the TOMS Turbo Drive is unusually able to format and read/write PC 180K format disks, with 9 sectors per track of 512 bytes each. It does so with a 1:1 interleave, which leads to suboptimal read/write speeds. A 512 byte per sector disk is indicated by both the Percom block and bit 6 being set in drive status.

