## 10.27 Indus GT hardware

## Controller

The Indus GT is controlled by a Z80 microprocessor running at 4MHz, with the following memory map:

```
Address range Mapping $8000-FFFF Upper 32K of RAMCharger RAM (if present) $7800-7FFF RAM (2K) $7000-77FF RAM (2K) (mirror) $6000-6FFF 1770/2797 FDC $4000-5FFF LED/misc control $3000-3FFF Step control (write only) $2000-2FFF Status 2 (read only) $1000-1FFF Status 1 (read only)
```

<!-- image -->

The lower 32K of address space can also be replaced with the lower 32K of RAMCharger memory.

## Status 1 port

Table 88: Indus GT status 1 port signals

<!-- image -->

| Bit   | Description                                                             |
|-------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Bit 7 | 1 = Write protect sensor latch (stays set when write protect is sensed) |
| Bit 6 | 1: Error button is depressed                                            |
| Bit 5 | 1: Drive type button is depressed                                       |
| Bit 4 | 1: Track button is depressed                                            |
| Bit 3 | 1: Not connected (always 1)                                             |
| Bit 2 | 0: S1-3 is closed (up) - selects double density as default              |
| Bit 1 | 0: S1-2 is closed (up) - assigns D3: or D4: to drive 79                 |
| Bit 0 | 0: S1-1 is closed (up) - assigns D2: or D4: to drive                    |

In addition, accessing the status 1 port with an even address clears bits 4-7 of the status port. Typically, the firmware accesses an even address first and then re-reads an odd address to query the port.

## Status 2 port

## Step control port

Writing to 3000-3FFFH controls the stepper motor. Bits 0-3 control the four phases, where a 1 bit activates a phase and only one phase is active at a time. Phases are activated in ascending order (0-1-2-3) for stepping inward to higher numbered tracks and descending order (3-2-1-0) for stepping outward to lower numbered tracks.

[79] Unlike the 810 and 1050, the Indus GT uses plain binary for drive ID.

Table 89: Indus GT status 2 port signals

<!-- image -->

| Bit   | Description                   |
|-------|-------------------------------|
| Bit 7 | 1 = FDC INTRQ asserted        |
| Bit 6 | 1 = FDC DRQ asserted          |
| Bit 5 | 0 = SIO COMMAND line asserted |
| Bit 4 | 1 = SIO READY line asserted   |
| Bit 3 | SIO DATA IN (non-inverted)    |
| Bit 2 | SIO DATAOUT (non-inverted)    |
| Bit 1 | SIO CLOCK IN (non-inverted)   |
| Bit 0 | SIO CLOCK OUT (non-inverted)  |

## LED/misc control ports

Bits 0-6 of $4xxx and $5xxx control the LED readout display, composed of two 7-segment digits. $4000-4FFF controls the ones (right) digit, while $5000-5FFF controls the tens (left) digit. There is no decimal point. Bits 0-6 are hooked up to segments A-G, which are, in order: top, top right, bottom right, bottom, bottom left, top left, and center. The bits are active low so that a 0 bit lights up a segment.

Bit 7 controls miscellaneous signals on both ports. Writing D7=0 to $4000-4FFF enables the busy light; writing D7=1 to $5000-5FFF enables write precompensation.

Since both ports are write-only, the LEDs must be rewritten to toggle the busy light or write precomp and vice versa.

## I/O ports

A number of signals are also tied to I/O ports in the range 00-0FH. Either an input or output operation will work as only the address matters:

- 00/01H: SIO AUDIO IN control
- 02/03H: Enable/disable drive index pulse (02H enables, 03H disables).
- 04/05H: SIO DATA IN / transmit to computer (04H transmits a 1).
- 06/07H: SIO DATA OUT / transmit as computer (06H transmits a 1).
- 08/09H: Set FDC density (08H = MFM, 09H = FM).
- 0A/0BH: Motor control (0AH = on).
- 0C/0DH: Direct index pulse control (0CH asserts).
- 0E/0FH: RAMCharger lower bank enable (0FH enables).

## SIO connections

The Indus GT is unusual in being wired such that it can both transmit and receive on both the SIO DATA IN and SIO DATA OUT lines, allowing it to act as a host as well as a peripheral. It can also send pulse waves on SIO AUDIO IN and read both the SIO CLOCK IN and SIO CLOCK OUT lines, also uncommon connections. However, it cannot drive the SIO clock lines, nor can it drive or sense the proceed, interrupt, or motor control lines.

Leading edges on the SIO COMMAND line trigger a maskable interrupt on the Z80. The interrupt request is cleared by any IO port access.

## RAM Charger

The optional RAM Charger adds 64K of RAM to the Indus GT, allowing it to buffer tracks and to run CP/M. The upper 32K of RAM is always mapped at $8000-FFFF, while the lower 32K of RAM can be bank-switched in by accessing ports 0EH and 0FH, where 0FH enables the RAM and 0EH disables it.

