## 10.29 Percom RFD

The Percom RFD is a 6809-based disk controller with one or two 5.25" drive mechanisms built-in and an expansion port to control up to two more external drives. Various sub-models include the RFD40-S1, RFD44-S1, RFD40-S2, and RFD44-S2.

## Firmware revisions

There are four known main revisions of the Percom RFD firmware and one close relative for Astra drives, which have compatible hardware and use nearly identical firmware.

Table 94: Percom RFD firmware revisions

| Revision                | Dates                 | CRC32    | Notes                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|-------------------------|-----------------------|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| V1.00                   |                       | 5A396459 |                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| V1.10                   | 1982-08-28 1982-11-08 | E2D4A05C | Fixes deleted sectors not being returned as errors; reassembled with shorter branches and 8-bit displacements.                                                                                   |
| V1.10 (Astra 1001/1620) |                       | 2AB65122 | Changes default step rate from 1 to 2; differs by only one byte from V1.10                                                                                                                       |
| V1.20                   |                       | C6C73D23 | Reverses sector interleave on side 2; fixes boot sector size override triggering on side 2                                                                                                       |
| V2.10                   |                       | AC141045 | Formatted sectors are filled with $00; delay added before ACK and after Complete; density detection no longer limited to D1:; recalibration skipped for CRC errors; long sectors reported as RNF |

The revision numbers and dates are not in the firmware but come from stickers on the EPROMs.

## Firmware quirks

V1.00 firmware fails to report deleted sector marks as an error when reading sectors, result in compatibility issues with some copy protected disks. This is fixed in V1.10.

V1.00-1.10 incorrectly check for a boot sector after mirroring logical sector numbers for side 2, resulting in some sectors on side 2 being forced to 128 bytes in double density. V1.20 fixes this and also reverses the sector interleave when formatting side 2 to account for the backwards sector mapping.

V1.00-1.20 will only do density detection for D1:, and format disks with non-zero data. These bugs are fixed in V2.10.

All known firmware revisions have an off-by-one bug when mapping logical sectors to physical sectors on side 2, using one physical sector lower than they should. The last logical sector is incorrectly mapped to track 0, sector 0 as a result.

## Density detection

Percom drives only detect and format single and double density. In theory they could support enhanced density by setting a custom option block, but they can neither detect nor format enhanced density.

Density detection only occurs when reading track 0, sector 1. It is not done for writes or reads from any other sector.

## Controller

The Percom's controller is a 6809 running at 1MHz.

| Address range   | Mapping                        |
|-----------------|--------------------------------|
| $F800-FFFF      | ROM (2K)                       |
| $F000-F7FF      | ROM (2K) (mirror)              |
| $DC00-DFFF      | Static RAM (1K)                |
| $D030-D033      | 6850 ACIA                      |
| $D018-D01B      | FDC control (write only)       |
| $D014-D017      | Switch sense and drive control |

## Interrupts

The fast IRQ (FIRQ) input of the 6809 is connected to the data request (DRQ) line of the floppy drive controller. For fast response time, the firmware does not actually use interrupts for data transfers; instead, it issues the SYNC instruction to block execution until DRQ is asserted.

The non-maskable interrupt (NMI) input on the 6809 is driven by a combination of the FDC's interrupt signal and a one-shot timer. The NMI signal is asserted at all times except when the timer is running and the FDC is not requesting an interrupt. Since the NMI is edge-activated, this effectively triggers an NMI whenever either the FDC finishes a command or the timer expires, whichever is first. The timer is activated by writing a 1 to bit 0 of $D018-D01B and has a period of at least a few hundred milliseconds, sufficient to cover a few rotations of the disk; it can be prematurely ended by clearing bit 0.

## ACIA

Communication over the serial I/O bus is handled by a 6850 ACIA. The SIO command signal is connected to the ACIA's Clear to Send (CTS) input.

The transmit and receive clocks are hardwired to 19200 baud (4MHz ÷ 13 as the 16x clock, to be exact), so the RFD-40S1 is one of the few drives that cannot do high-speed operation even with modified firmware.

## Switch sense

Addresses $D014-D017 read the state of the configuration switches and jumpers. Bits 0-3 read the switches on the back, while bit 4 reads an internal jumper. Bits 0-1 select the starting drive number, from D1: to D4: in binary code; bit 4, if set, shifts to the D5-D8: range.

Bit 7 reads the inverted index pulse (/IP) signal from the currently selected drive.

## Drive control

$D014-D017 controls miscellaneous drive functions. Bit 3, if set, enables drive select and turns on the motor for the selected drive; the drive is selected by bits 1-2. Bit 0 controls side (head) selection.

## FDC control

$D018-D01B drives logic to control the floppy drive controller.

Bit 3 gates the index pulse from the drive, disabling it if set.

Bit 2 selects single density (0) or double density (1). This bit is responsible for the strange 0/4 value of the density flag in the Percom block, as the firmware simply copies that bit to the hardware.

Bit 1 selects 8" or 5.25" operation. It is normally cleared for 5.25" operation, which selects a 4µs bit cell for FM and 2µs for MFM. When set, the data clock rate is doubled for 8" operation with 2µs for FM and 1µs for MFM.

Bit 0 controls the command timeout circuitry. When enabled, any write to the FDC resets the command timer, which will assert the NMI signal to the 6809 after the timer expires. The NMI signal will also be asserted if the FDC itself requests an interrupt. Resetting bit 0 disables the timer, causing it to hold NMI in the asserted state. This design means that NMI is asserted constantly when idle, but this does not cause a problem as the NMI

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

signal is edge triggered and only causes an interrupt when it transitions to an active state. This also prevents the FDC from triggering a second interrupt shortly after the timer expires.

