## 10.32 Amdek AMDC-I/II

The Amdek AMDC-I/II is a unique Atari-compatible disk drive using a non-standard 3" disk form factor.

## Enhanced density support

The AMDC has support for 1050-style enhanced density, but with significant quirks. It does not have the ability to automatically detect both enhanced density and double density disks, only able to detect one of them as selected by the 1050 compatibility switch.

Also, when selecting enhanced density, the firmware sets the total sector count to 1024 instead of 1040. This is presumably because of DOS 2.5, which only uses 1024 sectors. The format command does format the disk for the full 1040 sectors, and the drive can access the additional 16 sectors if the total sector count is overridden with the Write PERCOM Block command.

## Memory access commands ($58-5A)

Commands $58 and $59 allow arbitrary memory read/write access to the address given by AUX1 and AUX2, with AUX2 being the high-order byte. There is no restriction on transfer address. The transfer length is always 128 bytes.

Command $5A executes a subroutine call to the address given by AUX1/2. An RTS ends the command and returns control to the firmware. All usual command replies are suppressed, so not even the command ACK is sent by default.

These commands are only enabled if the internal jumper is connected and SW1-4 are set to either all off or all on. Otherwise, they are omitted from the command table check and NAKed by the drive.

## High-speed commands ($72/73/77)

The Amdek supports high-speed transfers, but not through a standard protocol. The $70, $72, and $77 commands are the high-speed versions of the put/read/write sector commands. The command frame, ACK/NAK, and Complete/Error bytes are sent at 19200 baud, with only the data frame and data frame checksum using high speed.

Currently, the high speed rate is currently unknown, as it is controlled by hardware and not determined by firmware. The reliability of high speed reads is also questionable as the firmware does not have a delay to wait for the checksum byte to complete transmission before reverting the transmission clock.

## Set density commands ($74/75/76)

The $74-76 commands set the current density to medium, single, and double density, respectively. They are equivalent to setting the same parameters through the Write PERCOM Block command.

## Reset command ($78)

Re-runs the power-on initialization code, clearing RAM, recalibrating drives, and resetting all internal settings

based on drive detection and switch settings. Unlike similar commands in some other drives, control flow is preserved and the command completes normally with a Complete byte after re-initialization.

## Set interleave command ($66)

Sends a 26-byte data frame to the drive containing the sector interleave order to use for the next format command ($21). The format command must immediately follow as any other command will clear the custom interleave table.

This command is notable for conflicting with the US Doubler's Format Skewed ($66) command, which has a similar purpose but is incompatible -- the data frame size is different and the Amdek requires a separate command to actually initiate the format operation.

## Get/set drive IDs commands ($63/64)

Gets or sets the drive IDs for all four drives as a four-byte data frame. There is no restriction on the drive IDs used.

## Get drive count ($69)

Returns the number of drive mechanisms detected by the firmware. This must be sent to the lowest drive ID as configured by SW5-6 and that drive must not have had its ID changed; sending this command to any other drive ID or to the lowest drive with the ID changed will result in a NAK.

## Check disk command ($43)

Turns on the disk drive and checks track 1 to determine density; returns a single byte data frame with $00 for no disk, $01 for single density (FM), and $02 for enhanced or double density (MFM). The density setting for the drive is also updated.

## Get drive speed command ($71)

Turns on the disk drive and measures index pulses to determine the spindle motor speed. On success, a twobyte data frame is returned containing a value that is 300 when the drive is correctly calibrated to 300 RPM, and lower or higher when the spindle is running slower or faster. The value is not quite a correct RPM value as it is calculated as (600 - period*1500) instead of 60/period. An error is returned if two index pulses are not detected within a timeout period.

## Read configuration ($73)

Returns the state of the configuration switches and jumpers on the drive as a one-byte data frame. Bits 0-6 contain SW1-SW7, while bit 7 contains the internal jumper state. SW8 is not returned. All bits are 1 for switch off and 0 for switch on.

## Get version commands ($56/$6D)

Command $56 returns a 25 byte data frame containing the version string for the drive. For version 1.1 firmware, this string is: " AMDC VER 1.1    1/30/84 ".

Command $6D returns another 25 byte data frame with alternate firmware information. For v1.1, it is: " RBM 10/27/83  HI MOM!!!! "

## Controller

The controller in the Amdek AMDC is a 1MHz 6809. Table 102 gives the memory map.

Table 102: Amdek AMDC-I/II memory map

<!-- image -->

| Address range   | Mapping                                 |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------|
| $F000-FFFF      | ROM (4K)                                |
| $E000-EFFF      | ROM (4K) (mirror)                       |
| $C000-DFFF      | Watchdog timer (read/write strobe only) |
| $8000-BFFF      | Switch sense (read only)                |
| $6000-7FFF      | Control port (write only)               |
| $4000-5FFF      | 1797 FDC                                |
| $2000-3FFF      | 6850 ACIA                               |
| $1800-1FFF      | Printer data port (write only)          |
| $1000-17FF      | Printer/jumper status port (read only)  |
| $0800-0FFF      | (Unknown write strobe)                  |
| $0400-07FF      | 4K static RAM (mirror)                  |
| $0000-03FF      | 4K static RAM                           |

## Switches

$8000 and $8001, and all mirrors above that within $8000-BFFF, read the state of eight externally settable DIP switches on the drive. All switches are read as a 0 for the 'on' state and 1 for 'off'. SW1-4 set the default density for each of the four disk drives and are returned in bits 0-3 of $8000, where 0 means single density and 1 means double density.

$8001 returns mixed settings from the state of SW5-8 in bits 0-3. SW5-6 in bits 0-1 determine the starting drive ID to use, with %00 assigning D1: to the first drive and %10 assigning D3: to the first drive. SW7 in bit 2 selects whether the internal or external drives are assigned first -- if 0, the internal drives are assigned drive IDs first, and 1 gives the external drives the lowest IDs. SW8 in bit 7 controls 1050 compatibility mode, where a 0 forces enhanced density only for MFM mode, while 1 enables double-density mode.

## Control port

Writes to $6000-7FFF activate a control port driving miscellaneous functions.

| Bit      | Description                                           |
|----------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| Bit 7    | FDC density select (1 = FM, 0 = MFM)                  |
| Bit 6    | (Unknown disk-related function)                       |
| Bit 5    | Printer strobe (1 = asserted)                         |
| Bit 4    | Spindle motor enable (1 = on)                         |
| Bit 3    | High speed enable (0 = 19200 baud, 1 = unknown speed) |
| Bits 0-1 | Drive select (non-inverted)                           |

## Printer port

Writes to $1800-1FFF set the printer data latch, which is then processed by the printer when the printer strobe is triggered through bit 5 of the control port.

Reads from $1000-17FF return printer status, including BUSY in bit 7 (1 = busy), SELECT in bit 6 (0 = printer present). Bits 4 and 5 are repurposed for other drive status, with bit 5 returning a 1 if there is a second internal drive (AMDC-II configuration).

Bit 4 reads the state of an internal jumper, returning 0 if the jumper is connected. The internal jumper enables test functions selected by SW1-4, including loops for testing memory, the printer port, and the SIO port, and the memory read/write/execute commands.

## ACIA

Serial bus communication occurs through a 6850 ACIA. SIO COMMAND is connected to CTS, and SIO READY to DCD. For standard speed communication, the ACIA receives a 19.2KHz × 16 clock. High speed uses a ×1 clock, but the clock rate is currently unknown.

