## 10.6 Anomalies

Abnormal sectors on the disk will trigger unusual behavior from the 810 disk drive. These can result from a corrupted disk, or they can be intentional in order to make a disk harder to copy. Copy protection mechanisms depend on the 810 and its floppy drive controller (FDC) responding to abnormal sectors in specific ways.

Note that because of the inverted FDC data bus on the 810, all FDC status bits are inverted when returned to the computer in a Status command. This means that a '0' bit indicates an error state, not a '1' bit. Table 54 gives values of status byte 1 for various conditions encountered during a sector read command. A (C) at the end indicates that the operation succeeds with a Complete ($43) code instead of Error ($45).

Table 54: FDC status codes for various read sector conditions

| Condition                          | Status    | Status   | Status   | Status      |
|------------------------------------|-----------|----------|----------|-------------|
|                                    | 810       | 1050     | XF551    | 815         |
| Normal operation                   | $FF (C)   | $FF (C)  | $FF (C)  | $00 (C)     |
| Write protected                    | $BF       | $BF      | $BF      | Last Status |
| Record not found                   | $EF       | $EF      | $FF 68   | $10 / $18   |
| Data CRC error or weak sector      | $F7       | $F7      | $F7      | $08         |
| Address CRC error                  | $E7       | $E7      | $FF      | $10 / $18   |
| Deleted sector                     | $9F       | $DF      | $DF      | $00         |
| Deleted sector with CRC error      | $97       | $D7      | $D7      | $00         |
| Long sector                        | $FC / $FE | $F9      | $F9      | $10 / $18   |
| Long sector with CRC error         | $FC / $FE | $F1      | $F1      | $10 / $18   |
| Deleted long sector                | $9C / $9E | $D9      | $D9      | $10 / $18   |
| Deleted long sector with CRC error | $9C / $9E | $D1      | $D1      | $10 / $18   |

For most cases, the drive will both return an (E)rror status and an FDC status code with at least one bit asserted (cleared). In a few specific cases and drives, an error will either be flagged only as Error without an FDC error set, or even go unreported entirely with the operation succeeding with Complete.

In general, the FDC does not retry operations on an error, the one exception being that it will make multiple passes on a track to try to find a valid sector address field. Once it has found a valid address field, it makes only one attempt to read or write the sector. Any retries, and re-steps or recalibrations of the head position, are done by the firmware. Generally only the error from the last attempt is returned.

[68] All RNF-class errors, including a missing data field and address CRC error are returned by the XF551 using type I status. This may include the write protect and track 0 bits.

## Record not found (missing address field)

If a matching address field for a sector cannot be found on a track, the FDC will make a couple more attempts to find it before giving up and returning Error. A sector's worth of data is still returned. FDC status bit 4 is cleared to indicate a Record Not Found (RNF) error.

The effort made to find the missing sector varies. The FDC is specified to wait up to five rotations, but many drives use a fake index pulse driven by a timer (RIOT) rather than the actual index pulse on the disk.

The XF551 is unusual in not reporting an FDC error for a missing sector. The read operation recalibrates and fails with an error, but the FDC error field in the status packet is often $FF instead of $EF, or may include other statuses such as $BF for a write protected disk. This is because the firmware resets the FDC after the type II command has timed out, which then resets the FDC to type I status.

## Record not found (missing data field)

If the address field is present and valid but the data field is missing during a Read Sector command, the FDC will resume searching for the sector until it times out. This generally means that a missing data field is indistinguishable from a missing sector entirely.

Write Sector operations, on the other hand, will not produce an RNF error because they don't check for or use the existing data field - the FDC rewrites the data field from scratch after matching the address field. Thus, a missing data field is ignored during a write operation, which will repair the sector by writing a good data field.

## No disk in drive

A more general issue than a missing sector is a missing disk. The 810 lacks the ability to detect a missing disk or open drive door and will simply attempt requested disk operations. This typically results in the drive in the same behavior as for a missing sector, including bumping the head against the track 0 stop each time, and takes a couple of seconds for the operation to fail.

1050 derived drives are different in that the drive latch does have a hardware sensor and it is tied to the Not Ready input on the FDC. This allows the firmware to detect when the drive door is open and immediately return an error to the computer, without even spinning up or seeking the drive mechanism, returning an error almost immediately for each command. This behavior differs by firmware revision, as some spin up the disk first and others do not.

Table 55: Disk drive behavior on Read Sector command with drive door/latch open and no disk inserted

| Disk Drive                                                                                      | Behavior                                                                                                                   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 810 810 Turbo Happy 810 Archiver 815 XF551 Indus GT ATR8000 Percom RFD/AT/ATSPD Amdek AMDC-I/II | Turns on motor and attempts to read with retries before returning Error + RNF.                                             |
| 1050 (rev. H, J) 1050 Duplicator                                                                | Turns on motor and returns Error + Not Ready without seeking.                                                              |
| 1050 (rev. K, L) Happy 1050 Super Archiver Tygrys 1050                                          | Returns Error + Not Ready without turning on motor.                                                                        |
| US Doubler I.S. Plate                                                                           | Returns NAK without turning on motor.                                                                                      |
| Speedy 1050                                                                                     | Boots copy software from controller ROM if initial D1: boot, otherwise returns Error + Not Ready without turning on motor. |
| 1050 Turbo 1050 Turbo II                                                                        | Boots copy software from controller ROM.                                                                                   |

## Data CRC error

The data field of each sector is protected by a Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC), which is a 16-bit code that is computed from the data and is written along with it. On read, the CRC is recomputed and verified against the written version to check if the data was read successfully. A mismatch indicates data corruption.

When a CRC error occurs, the 810 returns Error status instead of Complete status, but still returns the sector data. Bit 3 is also cleared in FDC status to indicate CRC Error.

Data CRC errors only occur for reads since for writes the CRC is generated and written instead of being read and checked. The CRC Error bit can still be asserted on an address CRC error, however.

## Address CRC error

The address field of each sector is also protected by a CRC. If the FDC finds an address field but the CRC check fails, it will continue searching for the sector. However, it does remember that an address CRC error occurred and set both the CRC and Record Not Found (RNF) bits if the only matching address fields it could find had bad CRCs. If duplicate sectors are present and one of the sectors has a valid address field, however, that sector will be used and the CRC Error bit will not be set.

The XF551 does not report either an RNF or CRC error for this condition, due to a quirk in the firmware. The read operation fails, but the FDC status reported is type I status (usually $FF, or $BF for a write-protected disk).

## Deleted/user sector

Each sector includes a data address mark byte that indicates the start of the sector data. The DAM is normally a modified $FB byte with some clock pulses missing, but the FDC also supports a modified $F8 byte to indicate a 'deleted' record, as well as $F9 and $FA for user type records. While the FDC considers this normal and reads the sector successfully, the firmware considers it an error and will retry the read. Upon failing out, it will send

back the sector's data with an Error status.

FDC models, and therefore drives, differ in the status raised for a deleted or user type sector. 810 drives use a 1771 controller, which returns the two record type bits in bits 5 and 6. A deleted sector will therefore return FDC status to the computer with bits 5 and 6 cleared. 1050 drives, however, use a 279X controller that only returns the MSB of the record type in bit 5, with bit 6 set for read operations. This means that an 810 will return $9F for a deleted sector while a 1050 will return $DF. It also means that the two user data types appear the same as normal and deleted data marks and are indistinguishable to either the computer or the drive firmware.

Deleted/user sector errors can only occur during reads. When writing a sector, the FDC switches from reading to writing after the address field and writes a new data field along with a new DAM; any old data field and DAM is never seen by the FDC, if it even existed.

## Long sector

The FDC used by the 810 supports 256, 512, and 1024 byte sectors as well as the 128 byte sector that the 810 uses, and more importantly, the sector size is recorded in the address field, but not in the command registers. The length of the transfer is determined solely by the size encoded in the address field. This provides an opportunity for the FDC and firmware to disagree on sector size.

Normally, the 810 firmware stops when the FDC asserts an interrupt, but due to a quirk in the firmware, it will also stop after reading 129 bytes and then immediately read the FDC status. Since the FDC is still reading the sector, the busy bit (bit 0) is guaranteed to be asserted, and the DRQ bit (bit 1) may also be asserted if another byte has been decoded in time. The lost data bit (bit 2) won't be asserted, though, because not enough time will have passed to lose a byte, and the CRC error bit (bit 3) won't be asserted because the FDC will have cleared it at the start of the command and not verified the CRC yet. Therefore, the FDC status will read either $FE or $FC. As usual, the first 128 bytes of the sector are returned along with the Error status.

The 1050 firmware differs here in that it waits for the FDC to complete its operation before reading status, while still not reading the pending data. This means that the Lost Data bit will be asserted, BUSY negated, and CRC Error state updated.

Not all drives report long sectors as errors. The firmware for some drives reads all bytes in the physical sector instead of using the logical sector size, meaning that they will read long sectors successfully without error. The Indus GT and Percom RFD-40S1 are two drives that do this.

## Weak sector

Weakly recorded or unrecorded data regions will appear as noise to the FDC. This results in random sector data, which virtually guarantees a CRC error. As with other error types, the read data will be returned even with the CRC error, allowing the weak sector to be detected.

## Phantom (duplicated) sectors

Multiple sectors within the same track can have duplicate sector IDs, in which case any of them may be found by the FDC. Since the FDC will return the first instance of the sector it finds, the phantom sector found depends on when the read command is issued and how long it takes for the firmware to issue the corresponding FDC command. Note that the firmware will attempt to retry up to two times on an error, which may mean that the first phantom sector found is not the one that is returned if the sectors also have errors.

The delays in processing the command and reading a physical sector affect the rotational timing, which in turn determines the phantom sector that is read. Ideal timings for an 810 drive running revision C firmware at 500KHz, with a drive mechanism running exactly at 288 RPM, no seeks required, and motor already on are given in Table 56.

Table 56: Ideal 810 sector read timing

| Event                                   | Time       | Rotation   |
|-----------------------------------------|------------|------------|
| Send command at 19200 baud              | 2.63 ms    | 4.54°      |
| Deassert command line                   | ?          | ?          |
| Command line deasserted toACK byte sent | 0.59 ms    | 1.02°      |
| ACK byte sent to FDC command issued     | 3.22 ms    | 5.56°      |
| Rotational delay                        | 0-208.3 ms | 0-360°     |
| Read physical sector                    | 9.66 ms    | 16.69°     |
| Compute checksum and return sector data | 74.06 ms   | 127.98°    |

Not counting additional delays for host-side processing, it takes a minimum of 90.16 ms (155.8°) to read a sector. For this reason, sectors need to be placed at nearly opposite sides of a track for the 810 to read them back-to-back.

