## 10.7 6532 RIOT

## Interval

Writing to register addresses $4-7 or $C-F starts the interval timer, which counts down from a specified initial delay. It is useful both for measuring time intervals and waiting for a specified time delay and can be used either in interrupt or polled mode.

The value written to the register determines the initial count, while address bits A1-A0 of the register used to write to the timer selects the rate for the prescaler, which divides down the system clock rate to a lower rate for the timer counter. The prescaler can be set to divide by 1, 8, 64, or 1024. Note that the last divisor is not evenly spaced.

The prescaler is reset along with the counter, so it always outputs pulses at a predictable offset from the timer write. For a written count of N and a prescaler interval of P, the timer delay to underflow/interrupt is N*P + 1 cycles.

## Timer interrupts

The interval timer can be configured to generate an interrupt every time its counter underflows. The timer IRQ is enabled by address bit 3 of accesses to read or write the timer. However, whether the timer IRQ is enabled does not affect the timer interrupt flag read by register $5, which will still be set or reset even if the IRQ is disabled.

The timer interrupt flag, and IRQ if enabled, are reset whenever the counter is read or written.

## Timer underflow

When the timer counter underflows, it sets the timer interrupt flag and then wraps around to $FF and begins counting down every cycle at 1T rate instead of at the rate specified by the prescaler. This will continue indefinitely, with the counter repeatedly underflowing every 256 counts and setting the interrupt flag again if it has been reset in the meantime.

## Reading the timer

Reading register $4 or $C will read the current counter value of the interval timer. This value counts down from

the initial value until it underflows and then continues counting down indefinitely. When the timer underflows and the timer interrupt flag is set, the counter switches to counting down at 1T rate regardless of the prescaler setting. Thus, after underflow, the counter indicates the negated number of cycles passed since underflow, not intervals.

There are two side effects of reading the timer value. The first is that the timer interrupt flag is cleared, unless an underflow happens to occur on the same cycle as the read. This happens regardless of the timer IRQ enable bit (A3). The second effect is that clearing the interrupt flag also resets counter operation from cycles back to intervals. Thus, after reading an 8T counter that has underflowed and begun decrementing at 1T, the counter will resume decrementing once every 8T.

## Timer counter timing

The prescaler is reset on writes to the timer so that it emits a pulse on the next cycle. Thus, the counter always decrements on the next cycle after the write to the timer.

Once the timer underflows and the timer flag is set, it immediately begins counting down at 1T rate, e.g.: 00 FF FE FD.

Prescaler timing is not affected by the switch to 1T or back. When a read occurs that resets the counter back to interval timing, it will next decrement at a multiple of 1T/8T/64T/1024T from when the counter first decremented, regardless of the offset at which the timer read occurred. This can cause an irregular delay from when the counter stops decrementing at 1T and next decrements at prescaler interval rate.

