## 10.8 177X/179X/279X FDC

Almost all Atari-compatible disk drives use a derivative of the Western Digital FD1771 floppy drive controller chip, the original chip used in the 810. This chip is only capable of FM (single density) encoding, so any drive that supports MFM encoding for enhanced or double density has a newer 179X/279X or 1772 chip, which supports both FM and MFM modes.

## 1793/2793 and 1797/2797 compatibility

MFM capable drives with multiple firmware revisions sometimes have compatibility issues between the 1793/2793 and 1797/2797 chips. The reason is differing interpretation of command bits for Read Sector and Write Sector commands depending on the capability of each chip. 1793/2793 chips use bits 1 and 3 of the read/write sector command to control side compare logic, while the 1797/2797 use it to control external side select signals.

Unfortunately, the two interpretations are not compatible, even for a single-sided drive that has no use for double-sided support. Early revisions of the 1050 firmware use a $82 command to read sectors, which on the 2793 enables side compare for side 0, but for the 2797 uses an alternate interpretation of the sector size field. Revision L of the firmware use $88 instead, which fixes the 2797 by disabling side compare on the 2793.

## Record Not Found (RNF) timeout

Most FDC models return a Record Not Found (RNF) error when a sector header is not found after five revolutions of the disk. The 1771, however, only requires two revolutions.

## Step rates

The FDC has four different options for step rate when executing seek commands, specified by the two low bits of the seek command.

## Write Track

## Waiting for index pulse

Write Track commands always write a complete track from index pulse to index pulse. The FDC pauses after waiting for the head to load and for the CPU to load the first byte before waiting for the leading edge of the index pulse. This is important since most Atari-compatible drives use a fake index pulse under CPU control. The FDC must see the index pulse signal deasserted and then asserted while it is waiting for the index pulse. If the IP signal is already deasserted or asserted and stays that way, the FDC will wait indefinitely. This is used by some drive firmware to hold off the FDC until the firmware is ready to begin writing bytes for the formatted track.

## Writing CRC bytes

The FDC will automatically compute CRC-16 values for ID and data fields while writing tracks. The FDC initializes its CRC logic when writing an ID address mark ($FE token) or data address mark ($F8-FB token) in FM, or an $A1 sync mark in MFM ($F5 token). That byte and all following bytes are included in the CRC computation until an $F7 token is encountered, upon which the CRC value is written out as two consecutive bytes. Because two bytes are written, the delay to the next DRQ is twice as long.

Except when reset by $F8-FB/FE in FM or $F5 in MFM, the CRC logic is always running and updating with every

[69] Older 1770/1772 datasheets specify either 30ms for both chips or 15ms for the 1772. The newer WD177X-00 datasheet which also includes the 1773 clarifies the timing being different between the two.

Table 57: Step rates for various FDC models

<!-- image -->

| Model   | 00   | 01    | 10    | 11    | Notes                                    |
|---------|------|-------|-------|-------|------------------------------------------|
| 1770    | 6 ms | 12 ms | 20 ms | 30 ms | At 8MHz; scale by 96% for 8.3MHz (XF551) |
| 1771    | 3 ms | 6 ms  | 10 ms | 15 ms | At 2MHz; double for 1MHz (810)           |
| 1772    | 2 ms | 3 ms  | 5 ms  | 6 ms  | At 8MHz; scale by 96% for 8.3MHz (XF551) |
| 279X    | 3 ms | 6 ms  | 10 ms | 15 ms | At 2MHz; double for 1MHz (1050)          |

It is important to note that these are not the step rates used by most disk drives, which expose stepper phases directly to the CPU and control step rate by wait loops in the firmware. This includes the 810 and the 1050, which actually step at 5.2 ms and 13 ms/track instead. The XF551, however, does use the FDC stepping circuitry and step rates.

## Head load delays

Read and write commands have an option to add a fixed delay to allow the head to load onto the disk surface. This option is commonly enabled by drive firmware. However, the specific delay varies between different chip models. It also varies by the clock rate, which is important since many of the FDC chips are clocked slower than normal for 5.25' drives.

Table 58: Head load delays for various FDC models

<!-- image -->

| Chip   | Specification   | Actual delay in drive     |
|--------|-----------------|---------------------------|
| 1770   | 30 ms (8MHz)    | 28.8 ms at 8.3MHz (XF551) |
| 1771   | 10 ms (2MHz)    | 20 ms at 1MHz (810)       |
| 1772   | 15 ms (8MHz) 69 | 14.4 ms at 8.3MHz (XF551) |
| 279X   | 15 ms (2MHz)    | 30 ms at 1MHz (1050)      |

byte written out to the disk. This includes the $F7 CRC token, for which the two CRC values are themselves included in the running CRC and can be reflected in a later CRC write. However, the FDC cannot write two CRC values back-to-back. When two consecutive $F7 tokens are written back-to-back, the FDC writes the second one as a regular $F7 data byte with normal one-byte timing. The sequence FB F7 F7 F7 thus writes to disk the data bytes FB BF 84 F7 9F F8 with clock bytes C7 FF FF FF FF FF, where $BF84 is the CRC-16 of [FB] and $9FF8 is the CRC-16 of [FB BF 84 F7].

## Read Track

## Initialization

Head load and index pulse synchronization for Read Track are the same as for Write Track.

## Sync mark behavior

When executing Read Track, the FDC returns only data bits, discarding clock bits. This prevents the CPU from accurately distinguishing sync bytes from non-sync bytes, as $FE may be both a valid data byte or an IDAM byte in FM mode.

The FDC does maintain byte synchronization from the last DAM or IDAM. Whenever a special sync mark is encountered, the FDC immediately returns it regardless of how many bits have been shifted into the shift register since the last byte returned. This means that the previous returned byte is likely to have some overlapping bits with the address mark and the DRQ for the address mark can arrive sooner than usual. For instance, a flux pattern with clock bits $C7FFFC7 and data bits $FEA00FE is returned as $FE A0 0F FE, because the second $FE IDAM is recognized and returned four bits after the previous $0F byte.

