## 10.9 810 disk drive

The 810 disk drive adapts a 5.25' floppy disk drive to the Atari SIO interface. Disks are formatted as singlesided, single-density with 18 128-byte sectors on 40 tracks, for a total of 720 sectors and 90K of storage. The disk geometry is abstracted from the computer so that the disk appears as a linear store of sectors numbered from 1-720 with simple read/write commands. Motor control and seeking are handled automatically by the drive.

## Commands

Commands are sent to the 810 using a standard SIO frame at 19200 baud, and follow usual conventions for ACK/NAK/Complete/Error.

Attempts to issue unknown commands or commands with bad arguments - a sector number of 0 or above 720 results in a NAK being sent for the original command. A valid command that fails because of a disk I/O error returns an ACK for the original command followed by an ERROR code for the command result, and then a data frame if one is expected for the command.

## Status ($53)

The status ('S' = $53) command is used to query the status of the 810 disk drive. The AUX1 and AUX2 bytes of the command frame are ignored. In response, the drive sends back a four byte status block:

- Drive status
- Bit 4 = 1: Motor running
- Bit 3 = 1: Failed due to write protected disk

- Bit 2 = 1: Unsuccessful PUT operation
- Floppy drive controller status (inverted from FDC)
- Bit 6 = 0: Write protect error
- Bit 5 = 0: Deleted sector (sector marked as deleted in sector header)
- Bit 4 = 0: Record not found (missing sector)
- Bit 3 = 0: CRC error
- Bit 2 = 0: Lost data
- Bit 1 = 0: Data pending
- Bit 0 = 0: Busy
- Default timeout ($E0 = 224 vertical blanks)
- Unused ($00)

## Read ($52)

The read ('R' = $52) command reads a 128 byte sector from the disk. The AUX1 and AUX2 bytes of the command frame hold the LSB and MSB, respectively, of the sector to read. On completion, the drive returns 128 bytes of sector data. This occurs even in the event of a read error.

If the sector number in AUX1/2 is 0 or greater than 720, the command is immediately NAKed.

## Put ($50)

The put ('P' = $50) command writes a 128 byte sector to the disk, without verification. The AUX1 and AUX2 bytes of the command frame hold the LSB and MSB, respectively, of the sector to read, and 128 bytes of sector data are sent by the computer following acknowledgment of the command frame.

If the sector number in AUX1/2 is 0 or greater than 720, the command is immediately NAKed.

## Write ($57)

The write command ('W' = $57) command is the same as the put command, except that it also re-reads the sector afterward to verify a successful write.

If the sector number in AUX1/2 is 0 or greater than 720, the command is immediately NAKed.

Due to a bug in the firmware, the 810 accepts $4F as an alias for $57.

## Format ($21)

The format command ('!' = $21) command formats a disk, writing 40 tracks and then verifying all sectors. All sectors are fill with the data byte $00. On completion, the drive returns a 128 byte buffer containing a list of 16-bit bad sector numbers, terminated by $FFFF.

## Track layout and timing

The disk rotates in an 810 drive at a rate of 288 revolutions per minute (RPM) or 4.8 revolutions per second. Each track is split into 18 sectors, so each sector arrives under the head at a rate of at least 86 sectors/second. The sectors are not necessarily distributed evenly, so they will tend to arrive a bit faster than that.

The floppy disk controller (FDC) in the 810 is clocked at 1MHz. Internally, this clock is divided by four to produce a 250KHz bit clock, which is then divided by two again for separate clock and data bits to produce a data rate of 125Kbits/second or 26,042 bits per track. For each sector, there are 128 data bytes, 28 bytes of header and CRC overhead, and then a 10 byte gap between each sector. This nominally places sectors 1328 bits (10.6 ms) apart. A 12 byte track header and an additional 256 pad bytes fill out the track.

Because of significant transfer delays, the 810 formats tracks with non-sequential sectors to reduce rotational latencies. This includes the time to read the sector from the disk, and more significantly, the time to transfer the sector to the computer at 19,200 baud. This takes 95ms, during which 9 sectors will pass under the disk head. If the sectors were written out in order, the next sector would already have been passed, requiring another disk rotation for the sector to arrive again. This is known as 'blowing a rev' and reduces the disk read rate to less than one sector per revolution. Instead, the 810 formats tracks with all odd sectors first and then all even sectors so that the next sector soon arrives under the head when the computer is issuing back-to-back read or write sector requests. The result is that two sectors can be read in a bit more than one revolution instead of just one, for an effective read rate within a track of about 1,170 bytes/sec or 11,700 baud.

Reading or writing sectors on another track also incurs seek delays. The 810 seeks at a rate of 5.3 ms/track, followed by an additional 10ms of head settling time at the end of the seek.

## Firmware revisions

There are three known revisions of the 810 firmware, revisions B, C, and E. The most common version is revision C. All firmware ROMs are 2K in size.

Table 59: 810 drive firmware revisions

| Revision   | CRC32    |
|------------|----------|
| Revision B | 19227D33 |
| Revision C | 0896F03D |
| Revision E | AAD220F4 |

## Revision B

Revision B is a rarer, earlier version of the 810 firmware, differing from revision C only in the sector order used when formatting a disk. Revision B used a slower sector order with a minimum spacing of 13 sectors, whereas C reduces this to the typical 9 sector distance.

## Revision E changes

The revision E ROM adds a few new commands to the 810 over rev. C, specifically ones that allow execution of custom code on the drive.

FDC status is also uninverted in revision E. For instance, a data CRC error produces a second status byte of $08 instead of $F7.

## $20 (download)

Command $20 takes a 128 byte data frame sent from the computer and executes it on the 810 at address $80. The firmware sends the command and data frame ACKs before calling the custom routine, and expects that routine to return with RTS. Afterward, the firmware sends the Complete signal back to the computer.

$80-FF and $180-1CF are available for use by the custom routine, the former for temporary storage during the

routine's execution, and the latter for permanent storage (not used by the firmware at all).

## $4F

The bug in revision C that allowed $4F as an alias for $57 (write sector) has been fixed; rev. E rejects $4F with a NAK.

## $54 (read address)

Reads 128 bytes of memory starting at the address specified by AUX1 and AUX2, where AUX1 is the LSB of the address, and sends that buffer back to the computer.

$FE and $FF are trashed by this command and cannot be read back.

## $FF (user downloaded command)

Jumps to user code pre-downloaded at $0180.

