## 3.1 Flags

Flags are stored in the P register of the CPU and both capture and store persistent state across multiple instructions. Most instructions on the 6502 implcitly set at least one flag during execution of their main operation, commonly the N and Z flags. Some of the flags also modify global CPU behavior, such as the interrupt mask (I) flag.

Address calculations never use or modify the flags. Thus, the addition in the absolute indexed addressing mode abs,X neither uses the carry flag as input nor modifies it based on the resulting address, nor is it subject to modification from the decimal (D) flag.

## Carry (C) flag (bit 0)

The carry flag extends many arithmetic and logical operations by one bit to allow processing of 16-bit or larger quantities in multiple 8-bit operations. For arithmetic operations, it supplies the carry or borrow input into bit 0 and receives the carry or borrow output out of bit 7, and similarly supplies inputs and captures outputs for shifts and rotates.

The 6502 notably differs from some other CPUs in the polarity of the C flag for subtract operations. On the 6502, C=1 indicates no borrow in/out for a subtract operation, and C=0 indicates a borrow. Thus, SBC is commonly preceded by SEC when a pure subtraction with no borrow in is desired. This interpretion is consistent with implementing subtraction by adding the one's complement (all bits inverted or XOR'd with $FF).

## Zero (Z) flag (bit 1)

The zero flag is set when the result of an operation is zero or all bits cleared, and clear otherwise. It is purely a result bit.

## Interrupt mask (I) flag (bit 2)

The I flag determines whether maskable interrupts are blocked or masked. If it is cleared, then IRQs are handled normally; if it is set, IRQs are "masked" and ignored by the CPU. NMIs are not affected by the I flag, as they are non-maskable.

The I flag is automatically set on reset to prevent the CPU from receiving stray IRQs until it has completed hardware and software initialization.

## Decimal (D) flag (bit 3)

The D bit (bit 3) in the processor status register activates decimal mode in the 6502. When set to 1, the ADC and SBC instructions perform BCD correction. CMP, CPX, CPY, INC, DEC, and indexed addressing are not affected.

NMOS 6502s do not clear the D flag automatically, so it must be cleared on reset. It should also be cleared in an interrupt handler if the interrupt code uses ADC or SBC and mainline code may use decimal mode.

## Break (B) flag (bit 4)

Bit 4 of the processor status register is the (B)reak bit and is used to indicate whether an IRQ or a BRK instruction caused the IRQ routine to be run. It is set if the trigger was an BRK and cleared if it was a IRQ.

Contrary to both official and unofficial documentation, the B bit does not actually exist in the P register. Attempting to clear bit 4 of P and reading the result back always gives a 1 bit. The only time the B flag is visible

is when the 6502 pushes the P register on the stack as part of interrupt handling. In that case, the P value pushed onto the stack will have bit 4 set for a BRK and cleared for an IRQ/NMI. In rare circumstances, it is possible for an NMI to piggyback on a BRK and the NMI vector can also be invoked with bit 4 set on the flags on the stack.

On the 65C816, bit 4 is reused as the index size (X) bit in native mode.

## Unused flag (bit 5)

The 6502 does not use bit 5 of the P register. It can't be cleared and always reads as a 1 when pushed to the stack with the PHP instruction or by interrupt entry.

On the 65C816, bit 5 is reused as the (M)ode bit in native mode.

## Overflow (V) flag (bit 6)

The V flag is set during arithmetic operations to indicate if a signed overflow has occurred, where the result is outside of the -128 to +127 range of a byte and has been truncated. It is cleared otherwise. This is sometimes implemented as the XOR of the carries out of bit 6 and bit 7. It is uncommonly used, being changed only by add, subtract, compare, and flags-specific operations. It also captures bit 6 of the source for a BIT instruction.

There is another uncommon use of the V flag, to capture an event signaled on the Set Overflow (SO) input on the CPU. Asserting SO results in the V flag being set asynchronously to regular code execution. This is not used on the main computer, but some peripherals using 6502-family CPUs do use this facility.

## Negative (N) flag (bit 7)

The N flag is usually set when the result of an operation is negative, i.e. the sign bit in bit 7 is set. More generally, it is usually copy of bit 7 of the result. There are a couple of exceptions, such as BIT setting the N flag to bit 7 of the source data rather than of the bitwise AND operation.

