## 3.2 Decimal mode

## Decimal correction

Decimal arithmetic in the 6502 works by correcting each nibble after addition or subtraction. For addition, 6 is added if the nibble result exceeds 10; for subtraction, 6 is subtracted if the result is negative. The carry between the low and high nibbles is computed before this correction, so the correction can never cause a double carry. For instance, for $0F + $0F, an intermediate result of $1E is computed, and the correction then produces $14.

## Flags computation

All flags are computed after carries are propagated between nibbles but before decimal correction occurs. 5

For addition, the C flag is set whenever there is a carry out from the high nibble, allowing for extended precision decimal arithmetic. For instance, $99 + $01 = $00 with carry set. For subtraction, it is cleared for a borrow.

The Z flag is set when the intermediate result is $00, before decimal correction. Example: $FF + $01 = $66, with Z set.

The N flag is also set according to the intermediate result, to match bit 7. Example: $99 + $01 = $00, with N set.

- [5] [IJO10]

The V flag is set when the carry between bit 6 and bit 7 is different than the result carry, or alternatively, when there is a signed overflow in binary arithmetic.

## 65C02 behavior

ADC and SBC take an additional cycle in decimal mode on the 65C02.

The 65C02 computes the N, V, and Z flags differently in decimal mode. All three are computed the same way as if the same result were achieved in binary mode. That is, N is set if bit 7 of the result is set; Z is set if the result is $00; V is set if the carry from bit 6 to bit 7 is different than the carry flag.

ADC produces the same results for invalid BCD encodings on the 65C02 as it does on the 6502, but SBC can produce different results. 6

## 65C816 behavior

The 65C816 computes decimal flags and results the same way as the 65C02, regardless of the state of the E flag. This means that the flags can be tested to distinguish a 6502 from a 65C816 in the same way. No extra cycle is taken as with the 65C02.

Unlike the 65C02, the 65C816 produces the same accumulator results as the 6502 for an SBC instruction with invalid BCD encodings.

