## 3.3 Cycle timing

## Clock speed

On an NTSC machine, the 6502 runs at exactly half the speed of the color clock, or 1.789773MHz. There are exactly 114 cycles per scan line and 29,868 cycles per frame. On a PAL machine, the 6502 runs at 2/5ths the color subcarrier frequency, or 1.773447MHz; there are still 114 cycles per scan line, but 35,568 cycles per frame.

## DMA contention

On occasion the Atari's custom chips must fetch data from memory. This is known as Direct Memory Access (DMA), and when it occurs, the 6502 is blocked from the memory bus while ANTIC does a read cycle. This phenomenon slows down execution of code on the CPU and is known as DMA contention. All DMA in the Atari is related to the display and therefore the graphics setup determines the reduction in CPU performance. For NTSC, the highest rate at which the CPU can run is 92% (1.65Mcycles/sec); the standard Graphics 0 display reduces this to 64% (1.14Mcycles/sec). PAL runs noticeably faster since all display related DMA runs only 5/6ths as often.

## Dead memory cycles

The 6502 uses the memory bus on every cycle without exception. Most of the time this is for useful work and therefore leads to very efficient bus utilization. There are cases, however, when these memory cycles are wasted cycles, such as:

- The second cycle of an implied mode instruction. (TXA)
- The ALU cycle of a read-modify-write instruction. (INC abs)

[6] [6502Dec]

- The second-to-last cycle of a zero page indexed read or write. (LDA zp,X)
- The second-to-last cycle of an absolute or indirect indexed write. (STA abs, X)
- The second-to-last cycle of an absolute or indirect indexed read that crosses a page boundary (AND abs, Y).
- Conditional branches that cross a page boundary (BNE).

A memory transaction is issued during these dummy cycles and therefore these dead cycles cannot be overlapped by DMA - the CPU must still be halted. For the most part these cycles are harmless, as the Atari is a fairly safe platform where reads to hardware registers seldom have side effects. There are a few cases in which this does matter and indexing should be used with care:

- Accessing the PIA ($D300-D3FF), because reads from the data registers will clear pending interrupts.
- Accessing the cartridge control region ($D500-D5FF). Some cartridges use this region to switch banks and will respond to both reads and writes.
- Accessing PBI devices ($D100-D1FE and $D600-D7FF), which may also have read-sensitive regions.
- Any access with a read-modify-write instruction, since the extra cycle is a write cycle (except on the 65C02 or 65C816 in native mode).

## Crossing page boundaries

The 6502 attempts to optimize indexed reads by issuing a speculative read before it has adjusted for a possible carry in the high byte. If no carry is required, a cycle is saved. Otherwise, if a carry is required, it will retry the read with the correct address. For example, given the following sequence:

- LDX #$80
- LDA $20F0,X

...the 6502 will read $2070 first, and then retry with the correct address $2170. The only modes that have this behavior are: abs,X, abs,Y, and (zp),Y. The zp,X, zp,Y, and (zp,X) modes do not need to index outside of zero page and wrap from $00FF to $0000 without an extra cycle; (zp),Y does not incur an extra cycle for using $FF as the zero-page address. The (abs) mode, unique to JMP, also lacks the extra clock due to the well-known bug on the NMOS 6502 of accessing $xxFF and $xx00.

Writes, on the other hand, cannot be done speculatively as a wrong guess would trash an unrelated memory location. Therefore, stores using the abs,X, abs,Y, and (zp),Y modes always take the extra clock cycle. The first clock cycle is a speculative read and the second clock cycle is a write with the correct address. Read-modifywrite instructions also always take an extra clock cycle, indexed or not, except that the dummy cycle is a write cycle.

Branches that cross a page boundary also have this behavior, doing a read with an incorrect address high byte first, and taking four clock cycles instead of three. No additional cycle is taken to cross a page boundary for a non-taken branch, a JMP, JSR, RTI, or RTS instruction, or any other non-branch execution.

## Note

A branch crosses a page boundary when the addition of the signed branch offset changes the high byte of the PC. This means that a page crossing occurs if the target is on a different page from the address of the next instruction, not from the address of the branch instruction. For instance, a BCC $80C0 instruction at $80FE crosses a page because it is branching from $8100 to $80C0, even though the branch instruction itself is entirely within the same page as its target. Similarly, a BEQ $8110 instruction at $80FE does not cross a page. This happens because the branch offset is added after the PC has already been incremented for both bytes of the branch instruction.

