## 3.4 Interrupts

## Level-based vs. edge-based interrupts

IRQs on the 6502 are level triggered interrupts, which means that the interrupt request is a continuing condition that is active as long as the IRQ line is asserted. This facilitates delayed response to the IRQ as the 6502 will eventually respond to the IRQ as long as the device continues to assert the IRQ line. It also allows for multiplexing as multiple devices can assert IRQ and the 6502 will execute the IRQ handler repeatedly until all interrupts are handled. However, this also means that the interrupt condition must be cleared on the device or else the IRQ handler will continue to execute. It also means there is no memory of an interrupt event - if an interrupt request occurs while IRQs are masked in the 6502 and is revoked before they are unmasked, the IRQ handler will not execute.

NMIs, on the other hand, are edge triggered and are one-time event rather than a condition. Once the NMI signal is asserted, the 6502 will execute the NMI handler at the next opportunity. If a second NMI is requested before the first one is acknowledged, the NMI handler will only run once and the other NMI is lost.

## Interrupt timing

The 6502 does not abort or resume instructions and can only respond to an interrupt on instruction boundaries. This means that longer instructions can increase interrupt response delay. The longest standard instruction possible on the 6502 is seven clocks, which can be due to a (zp),Y access crossing a page boundary, a readmodify-write instruction using abs,X mode, or a BRK/interrupt. A delay of 8 cycles is possible with undocumented read-modify-write instructions that use indirect indexed or indexed indirect mode, such as opcode $13. However, much longer delays can occur if a store to WSYNC [D40A] is performed, which can lengthen an instruction by as much as a hundred clock cycles. Use of WSYNC should be avoided if display list interrupts or other time-critical interrupts are active.

## Clearing I with an interrupt pending

If an interrupt is already pending but is blocked by the I flag, clearing the I flag with a CLI or PLP instruction will result in the interrupt occurring at the end of the next instruction, and not immediately after the clearing instruction. For instance, given the following code:

## CLI NOP

The pending interrupt will not be serviced until the end of the NOP instruction. This does not happen with the RTI instruction; an IRQ can be serviced immediately after an RTI that clears the I flag.

## Setting the I flag with an interrupt pending

Because of pipelining within the 6502, it is possible for the last cycle of a SEI or PLP instruction to execute immediately after the 6502 begins to acknowledge an IRQ. When this happens, the IRQ routine begins executing before the next instruction, and the curious result is that an IRQ executes with the pushed flags on the stack having the I bit set. The most common way to hit this behavior is using the following sequence to dispatch pending IRQs at a well-defined time:

## CLI SEI

This does not happen with the RTI instruction, which changes the flags earlier in the instruction. This effect occurs with CLI+SEI and CLI+PLP pairs; it does not occur with CLI+RTI, PLP+[SEI/RTI/PLP], or RTI+[SEI/RTI/PLP], for which no IRQ is dispatched even if one is pending.

## Taken branch delay

A taken relative branch delays interrupt acknowledgment by one cycle: a case in which the earliest opportunity to respond to an interrupt is immediately after the branch instead is delayed to the next instruction. This occurs for any Bcc instruction which does not cross a page boundary. The effect does not occur if the branch instruction crosses a page (4 cycles), or for any other control flow instruction such as JMP, JSR, RTS, or RTI.

## Overlapping interrupts

It is possible for the 6502 to first begin executing the seven-cycle interrupt sequence for an IRQ and then jump to the NMI vector instead if an NMI occurs quickly enough.

For IRQ+NMI conflicts, this behavior simply leads to faster acknowledgment of the NMI. However, it also has unfortunate consequences for the BRK ($00) instruction. The BRK instruction is essentially the same as an IRQ except that the flags byte pushed on the stack has the B flag set. Because of this, it is possible for an NMI to hijack the BRK sequence in the same way. When this occurs, the NMI vector is invoked with the B flag set on the flags byte on the stack. Thus, robust handling of BRK instructions requires it to be checked for in both the IRQ and NMI handlers. 7

There are no issues with an overlapping IRQ and BRK instruction. However, when multiplexing the IRQ vector for both IRQ and BRK, the BRK instruction must be serviced before the handler exits. For multiplexed IRQs, the handler can service one IRQ at a time, relying on the hardware to keep IRQ asserted as causing the handler to re-execute until all IRQs are serviced. This is not true for BRK, which will be lost if not serviced.

On the Atari, this effect occurs if a BRK instruction begins execution at between cycles 4-8 of a scan line where either the DLI or VBI is activated.

[7] This effect is covered in detail in [VIC09], under 6510 Instruction Timing. The effect of an IRQ on a BRK is arguably not a bug, as I can find no program-visible effects: the BRK executes as expected, and the IRQ is then acknowledged afterward assuming that the IRQ line is still asserted. This does require that the IRQ handler check BRK first, though, which usually doesn't happen.

Figure 2: Effects of overlapping IRQ/NMI timing

<!-- image -->

The table above shows how the 6502 responds to IRQ and NMI being asserted at varying offsets from each other. When the IRQ occurs sufficiently before the NMI, the 6502 completes the pending interrupt sequence or current instruction before beginning the interrupt sequence for the NMI. This always entails a minimum of at least 7 cycles for the interrupt sequence and 6 cycles for the first instruction of the IRQ handler (LSR abs, 6 cycles). Unusual behavior starts when the IRQ sequence begins on cycle 4, which causes the NMI to be lost entirely. Afterward, the IRQ sequence that would begin at cycle 5 or later is taken over by the NMI, resulting in the NMI handler executing earlier than usual. The exact same timing occurs with BRK instead of IRQ.

## Consecutive interrupts

The 6502 cannot acknowledge an interrupt immediately after executing an interrupt sequence. This includes BRK, IRQ, and NMI. The first instruction of the IRQ or NMI handler is always executed, regardless of any pending interrupt. The one case where interrupt sequences will execute back-to-back is if the first instruction of the interrupt handler is a BRK instruction. Because the BRK instruction is piggybacked on top of the interrupt logic, a pending interrupt can hijack the BRK instruction to run the interrupt handler instead.

