## 3.8 65C816 new features

New to the 65C816 is the ability to switch into native mode , which unlocks the full power of the 65C816 including 16-bit memory access, arithmetic, and indexing, extended addressing, and extended interrupt handling.

## M and X flags

The formerly unused bits 5 and 4 of the P register are re-purposed in native mode as the M and X flags, respectively. The M flag selects the width of memory and accumulator operations, whereas the X flag selects the width of operations involving the X and Y index registers. Indexed addressing and memory accesses from X/Y based instructions like PHX and CPY use the X flag. In both cases, a flag value of 1 selects 8-bit width, and 0 selects 16-bit width. Both M and X flags are forced to 1 upon entering emulation mode and cannot be changed until native mode is re-entered.

Whenever the X flag is set to 1 for any reason, the high bytes of the X and Y registers are cleared to $00 and their previous contents are lost. This happens both with an explicit change to the X flag and implicitly when switching to emulation mode. Changing the X flag back to 0 does not restore the previous contents of the high bytes, which will remain $00. However, setting the M flag to 1 does not clear the high byte of the accumulator register, which can still be accessed by the XBA, TCS, TSC, TCD, TDC, TAX, and TAY instructions.

Some memory access and accumulator-based operations are always 16-bit regardless of state of the M flag, because they involve registers or values that are inherently 16-bit wide. These include accesses to the D register (PHD, PLD, TCD, and TDC), accesses to the S register (TCS, TSC, TXS, TSX), push effective address instructions (PEA, PEI, PER), and indirect addressing modes ((dp), (dp,X), (dp),Y, etc).

## Switching to native mode

The only way to enter native mode is with the XCE instruction, which exchanges the carry and emulation state flags. Executing XCE with C=0 enters native mode and sets C=1 if the CPU was previously in emulation mode. Entering native mode switches the CPU to the alternate native mode set of interrupts vectors and unlocks the M/X bits in the P register.

Executing XCE with C=1 exits native mode and switches back to emulation mode. When this happens, the emulation interrupt vectors become active, M/X bits are set to 1, the upper bytes of the X and Y registers are lost and reset to $00, and the high byte of the stack pointer is set to $01. The values of the D, DBK (B), and PBK (K) registers are unaffected, however.

Many new features of the 65C816 do not require native mode to use. New instructions, new addressing modes, 24-bit addressing, and 16-bit operations that do not depend on clearing M/X bits can be used directly from emulation mode. However, the ability to execute code in banks other than bank 0 is of limited use as interrupts do not save the program bank on the stack in emulation mode, making it impossible to return to the interrupted routine.

## Extended direct page addressing

In emulation mode, the dp,X and dp,Y addressing modes wrap within a page by default to emulate the behavior of the 6502's zp,X and zp,Y addressing modes. This occurs whenever the low byte of the D register is $00, which is the default as D is set to $0000 on reset. If the D register is modified to a value where the low byte is not $00, then direct page indexing will cross pages, but at the cost of one additional cycle per direct page indexed instruction. This extra cycle occurs regardless of whether a page crossing occurs.

There are a couple of exceptions to direct page wrapping in emulation mode. Instructions that read words from direct page and are new to the 65C816 will cross pages regardless of the low byte of D. This includes PEI (dp) and instructions using the [dp] and [dp],Y addressing modes, which will cross over from $00FF to $0100 and $0101 with D=0. The (dp) and (dp),Y addressing modes will wrap in this case, with ($FF) and ($FF),Y reading the base address from $FF and $00.

The (dp,X) addressing mode has mixed behavior in emulation mode. With the low byte of D set to $00, (dp,X) has the 6502/65C02 compatible behavior of wrapping within the page. However, when the low byte of D is not $00, the address computation for the low byte will cross pages and then the high byte will wrap. For instance, ($FF,X) with X=$FF and D=1 will read the low byte from $01FF and the high byte from $0100.

In native mode, all direct page accesses cross page boundaries with any instruction regardless of the value of D. Indexing will cross pages freely, and 16-bit accesses starting at $xxFF will continue to $yy00 on the next page. No additional clock cycles are taken when doing so. However, direct page accesses always wrap within bank 0, and if the low byte of D is not $00, all direct page indexed addressing will take an additional cycle regardless of whether a page crossing occurs.

## Extended stack addressing in native mode

The stack pointer is 16 bits wide in native mode and thus the stack can be of any length and start at any address. Like direct page accesses, stack-relative accesses are always constrained to be within bank 0, even when wrapping from $FFFF to $0000.

## Warning

In emulation mode, the high byte of the stack pointer is constrained to $01, so setting the stack pointer via TXS places the stack in the $01xx page as it does on the 6502. However, in native mode, executing TXS with 8-bit indexing (X flag set) sets the stack pointer to $00xx, which is typically undesirable. This means that setting the stack in native mode usually requires either 16-bit indexing mode or using TCS instead.

Similarly to when the X flag is set, whenever emulation mode is entered, the high byte of S is reset to $01 and the previous contents are lost.

## Extended stack addressing in emulation mode

During emulation mode, stack operations performed by all 6502 and 65C02 instructions are constrained to page one. However, almost all new instructions introduced on the 65C816 that access the stack will temporarily index and write outside of page 1 into page zero when pushing or read from page two when popping. 10

Instructions that have this behavior: PHD, PLD, PLB, PEA, PEI, PER, JSL, JSR (a,X), RTL, LDA d,S, STA d,S, LDA (d,S),Y.

Instructions that don't have this behavior: PLX, COP, PHB, PHK. The latter two instructions, although new to the 65C816, can't differ in behavior because they only push a single byte, which is always within page one regardless.

The stack pointer is readjusted to be within page 1 again after the instruction executes. For instance, executing PHD twice with S=0 will write to $0100 and $00FF, then $01FE and $01FD. Similarly, RTL with S=$FF will read from $0200-0202 and then finish with S=$02.

## Interrupt vectors

In native mode, a different set of interrupt vectors is used: ($FFEE) for IRQ, ($FFEA) for NMI, ($FFE6) for BRK, ($FFE4) for COP, and ($FFE8) for ABORT. The dedicated BRK vector means that it is no longer necessary to check for it in IRQ and NMI handlers.

There is no native RESET vector because the 65C816 always switches to emulation mode on reset. Thus, ($FFFC) is always used.

