## D.2 NTSC color encoding

## Luminance and chrominance

In the NTSC system, color values are split into luminance and chrominance. The luminance value is the brightness or grayscale value, and is simply encoded as a signal with luminance mapped to voltage. Chrominance is the color information ignoring luminance. Typically the luminance value is named Y in equations while chrominance has two values which can be I and Q or U and V depending on the color space used. Together, the three values form a 3D coordinate in YIQ or YUV space, which is different from but can be mapped to and from RGB space.

## Color subcarrier

The two chrominance values are encoded into a single color signal through quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) , encoding both values into a single sine wave at 3.58MHz. This signal is called the color subcarrier. The phase of the sine wave determines the hue of the color, while the amplitude determines the saturation. For areas of the picture that have no color, the amplitude is 0 and the subcarrier is absent.

The rate at which the NTSC GTIA produces pixels is directly related to the color subcarrier: the width of one lores pixel is one cycle of the color subcarrier or color clock, and a hi-res pixel is half a cycle. Thus, there are exactly 228 cycles of the color subcarrier per scanline.

## YIQ color space

The color subcarrier can be represented as the sum of two component sine waves, one 90° out of phase with the other. The amplitudes of these two components are called in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q), and can represent the color subcarrier at any arbitrary amplitude r and phase ϕ:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The two representations are equivalent. On a 2D chrominance chart, the I/Q coordinates are the Cartesian coordinates of the point with (r, ϕ) as the polar coordinates, which also correspond to saturation and hue. Adding in Y gives a coordinate in the YIQ color space.

(135°)

-U (180°)

NTSC

colorburst

-Q (213°)

PAL colorburst 2

(225°)

(G-Y) (236°)/

Figure 23: YIQ/YUV color space relations

<!-- image -->

The YIQ color space is defined in terms of the RGB color space, with an affine transform converting converting between them. To three decimal places, the decoding and encoding conversions are as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For R/G/B values in [0, 1], the Y range is [0, 1], I range is [-0.596,0.596], and Q range is [-0.523, 0.523].

red (103.4°)

+V (90°)

(R-Y)

The exact conversion matrices vary due to specifications giving the constants to different precision and also use of non-standard matrices in the field. An extended discussion of the derivation of these matrices and variance in specification is in [SMPTE 170M-2004].

## YUV equivalence

An alternate color space that can be used is YUV, defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

YUV has a simpler definition of the chroma axes, with U being directly proportional to the blue color difference (B-Y) and V to the red color difference (R-Y), as indicated by the zeroes in the decoding matrix. This simplifies decoding, with only the green difference (G-Y) requiring full matrix treatment.

However, as YUV is related to RGB by an affine transform, it is also similarly related to YIQ, and conversion between them simply requires a 33° rotation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This means that generating colors in YIQ space and YUV space are equivalent, as long as the 33° angle difference is taken into account. Some TVs also use this to simplify decoding hardware by directly decoding NTSC composite video to YUV, directly extracting blue and red difference signals from demodulation and combining those to get the green difference signal.

Note that the definition of YUV here should not be confused with the 'YUV' sometimes used to refer to component or digital video, also known as YCbCr. These equations are often found for converting from YUV to RGB, and should not be confused with the ones used for analog video, as they are based on similar concepts but use additional scaling and bias factors for the components:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, a matrix using [0.2126 0.7152 0.0722] as the luminance (Y) axis in RGB space is for the Rec. 709 color space for HD, and not applicable to NTSC decoding. It is possible to map YIQ or YUV values to one of these YCbCr spaces, but doing so takes a color matrix comparable to conversion to or from RGB.

## Luminance encoding

The luminance (Y) portion of the signal is generated by GTIA off of the brightness portion of the color register or color value providing a pixel's color. This conversion is done outside of GTIA through a simple resistor DAC, which linearly converts the brightness value to equal voltage steps. A simple and serviceable approximation is

therefore just:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A more accurate conversion takes into account a quirk in the DAC which results in brightness values 7 and 8 being noticeably closer than expected. This is due to slightly mismatched resistor values in the DAC. LUM0 and LUM1 use resistor values 36KΩ and 18KΩ, which are matched by a factor of two as expected, and LUM2 uses 9.1KΩ, which is only a small bit off. LUM3 uses 4.7KΩ, however, which is off by a larger amount and results in brightness values 8-15 being visibly darker. Table 116 gives measured signal levels on three different NTSC machines.

Table 116: Measured signal levels for sync and all luminances

|         | Signal levels (+/-0.008V)   | Signal levels (+/-0.008V)   | Signal levels (+/-0.008V)   | Signal levels (+/-0.008V)   |
|---------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Element | 800XL                       | 130XE                       | 800                         | 400 92                      |
| Sync    | 0.580V                      | 0.044V                      | 0.080V                      | 3.604V                      |
| Luma 0  | 1.112V                      | 0.468V                      | 0.640V                      | 3.736V                      |
| Luma 1  | 1.184V                      | 0.532V                      | 0.696V                      | 3.752V                      |
| Luma 2  | 1.264V                      | 0.596V                      | 0.744V                      | 3.768V                      |
| Luma 3  | 1.334V                      | 0.660V                      | 0.800V                      | 3.780V                      |
| Luma 4  | 1.408V                      | 0.716V                      | 0.856V                      | 3.792V                      |
| Luma 5  | 1.488V                      | 0.780V                      | 0.904V                      | 3.808V                      |
| Luma 6  | 1.568V                      | 0.852V                      | 0.960V                      | 3.820V                      |
| Luma 7  | 1.648V                      | 0.908V                      | 1.016V                      | 3.836V                      |
| Luma 8  | 1.688V                      | 0.940V                      | 1.056V                      | 3.848V                      |
| Luma 9  | 1.760V                      | 1.004V                      | 1.112V                      | 3.864V                      |
| Luma 10 | 1.840V                      | 1.068V                      | 1.160V                      | 3.876V                      |
| Luma 11 | 1.928V                      | 1.132V                      | 1.224V                      | 3.892V                      |
| Luma 12 | 1.992V                      | 1.196V                      | 1.272V                      | 3.904V                      |
| Luma 13 | 2.072V                      | 1.260V                      | 1.328V                      | 3.920V                      |
| Luma 14 | 2.144V                      | 1.324V                      | 1.384V                      | 3.936V                      |
| Luma 15 | 2.224V                      | 1.380V                      | 1.440V                      | 3.952V                      |

An additional complication arises from the presence of a setup or pedestal in NTSC. The NTSC video standard specifies that the signal level for black during the active period of a scanline is higher than the 0V used during blanking periods. This is the pedestal . In the conventional IRE unit used to measure video signal levels, the blanking level is 0 IRE, the pedestal or black level is 7.5 IRE, and white level is 100 IRE.

GTIA does not use the pedestal when encoding its signal, which has implications for the encoded color. Instead, it maps luminance level 0 directly to blanking level at 0 IRE, which causes it to be 'blacker-than-black.' The result is that GTIA colors are slightly darker than expected at the low end, and additionally causes some noticeable hue shifts in the darkest color due to negative RGB outputs clamping to zero. Mapping brightness 015 to the 0-100 IRE range gives a brightness 0 luma value of -8%. However, actual results may vary on TVs, as some use non-standard or dynamic black levels. The Japanese variant standard NTSC-J also lacks setup, for instance.

[92] The 400 does not have a composite output, which makes this measurement tricky. These measurements were taken with a probe on R203 before the RF modulator and low pass filtering enabled on the oscilloscope to filter out the audio subcarrier.

## NTSC GTIA color encoding

The NTSC GTIA chip generates colors by mapping the hue portion to the phase of the chroma signal, with no chroma signal being generated for hue 0. All other hues generate chroma with the same amplitude, so saturation is the same for all hues.

The phase of the chroma signal is determined by a delay chain within GTIA, which produces 15 different phases by successive delays from a reference clock, with each higher numbered hue producing an additional phase delay. The delay is the same for each stage and thus all hues are evenly spaced in angle, but the spacing is determined by a color adjustment potentiometer on the motherboard. Thus, the 15 hues do not necessarily cover the full 360° evenly, as the cumulative phase delays to hue 15 may result in that color being short or even wrapping around past hue 1. The color delay can be adjusted all the way down to 0°, but is typically somewhere within 23.5° to 27.5° per hue.

Hue 1 is also special because it doubles as the phase for the color burst , a small portion of color signal emitted in horizontal blank to synchronize the display to the correct phase for the color signal. The color burst is defined to be at 180° (-U) in color space, or -57° behind I in I-Q space. This means that the color of hue 1 is deterimined solely by the display and not by the color delay adjustment.

Hue values can therefore be mapped to I-Q space by a simple polar mapping:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The tint control on the display normally rotates the hue space, shifting the colorburst color and all other colors by the same amount. The -57° specification used by calibrated and modern TV sets gives a greenish yellow color to hue 1. This may differ on TV sets that have had their tint controls adjusted or were tuned differently from the NTSC standard. For instance, the Commodore C1702 monitor has its tint control centered at a location that produces a hue 1 color closer to around -33°. The notion of a "correct" contemporary display look is very subjective, but research into color selections on various games by members on AtariAge has suggested that many NTSC games were developed on displays at the time that had more reddish hue 1 colors than produced by modern displays.

## Saturation

The saturation of the color produced is determined by amplitude of the chroma signal. This amplitude varies with different computer models, but this variation is cancelled by the chroma automatic gain control (AGC) in the display as the chroma amplitude is interpreted relative to the color burst, which also has the same amplitude. The color burst is specified in NTSC as having a peak-to-peak amplitude of 40 IRE, so the magnitude of the color vector in I-Q space is 20 IRE.

However, interpreting this value is complicated by the various models having different luma ranges, none of which place white at 100 IRE. One method of AGC corrects the luma using the sync pulse as a reference, which is supposed to have a signal level of -40 IRE. Using the signal levels in Table 116, the saturation can be derived as a ratio from the chroma vector in I-Q space to the full 0-15 brightness value range:

|                                            | 800XL   | 130XE   | 800     | 400     |
|--------------------------------------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| Sync to luma 0 voltage (IRE -40 reference) | -0.532V | -0.424V | -0.560V | -0.132V |

Or, equivalently, in U-V:

Table 117: NTSC saturation ratios

<!-- image -->

| Luma 0 to 15 voltage        | 1.112V   | 0.912V   | 0.800V   | 0.216V   |
|-----------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
| AGC corrected luma 15 level | 83.6 IRE | 86.0 IRE | 57.1 IRE | 65.4 IRE |
| Saturation                  | 23.9%    | 23.3%    | 35.0%    | 30.6%    |

That is, on the 800XL, the chroma and luma AGCs produce a chroma signal that is 23.9% of the total range of luma from brightness 0 to brightness 15. Note that this ignores the pedestal, which biases Y during conversion to RGB but does not affect saturation when computing I/Q or U/V.

The 800's luma signal is noticeably weaker than that of the XL/XE models, which causes it to have much more saturated colors.

## Gamma correction

NTSC color encoding is designed to work with the transfer characteritics of CRT cameras and displays, and therefore use non-linear RGB encoding. This means that conversions between YIQ/YUV and RGB should be performed directly in gamma space; they should not be performed in linear color and then converted to gamma space.

The reference gamma for NTSC is specified either as either an exponent of 2.2 or a short linear section near zero combined with a 2.22 curve. This is similar to but not quite the same as the sRGB color space now ubiquitous on modern computers, which uses a short linear section of different length followed by a 2.4 curve. Converting from NTSC gamma space to linear and back to sRGB produces the most correct results, although the difference is not significant.

## Color correction

A subtle source of error in NTSC color reproduction is the difference in color primaries between NTSC and modern sRGB displays. Failing to correct for this produces small color shifts in some critical portions of GTIA's palette, most notably affecting the GR.0 blue color.

Figure 24: Effect of color correction on computed palette

<!-- image -->

The left image is a palette computed with the result of the YIQ to RGB conversion directly interpreted as sRGB, the right image is with correction from NTSC primaries to sRGB. The main effect is to boost the contribution from blue, which reduces makes the $94 GR.0 background color less purple, and to reduce contribution from green. Saturation at the low end is also boosted somewhat.

One method of correcting for this difference involves converting from NTSC RGB to sRGB through a common color space, such as XYZ. This requires converting from NTSC gamma to linear, multiplying by two affine matrices to convert from NTSC linear RGB to XYZ and then to linearized sRGB, then to regular sRGB. A set of conversion matrices to accomplish this is given by [Lindbloom].

Figure 24 shows the effect of applying this type of correction to the final color palette. This helps improve the accuracy of the palette as it would be displayed on a modern TV set. The necessary conversion may differ when simulating a contemporary monitor, however, as older monitors may use different primaries than the original NTSC specification.

## Non-standard decoding matrices

Another method used in practice for compensating for the differing color primaries is with a non-standard decoding matrix. The standard decoding matrix places the (R-Y) and (B-Y) color differences at right angles to each other in chrominance space, with U and V orthogonal. This is not universal practice, and many NTSC decoding chips have been specifically designed to use non-standard matrices that produce different decoding angles.

## Note

The angles for the (B-Y) and (R-Y) color differences aren't the same as the angles for pure red and blue. Red and blue have non-zero luma and thus both non-zero (R-Y) and (B-Y).

The hue angles and gain values for the RGB difference signals can be computed by converting the U-V basis vectors in the YUV-to-RGB conversion matrix to polar form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These are sometimes specified in hardware datasheets for decoders as relative to B-Y, placing R-Y at 116.3° and G-Y at 253.6°. Two of these can be customized; adjusting the third is equivalent to modifying tint or the reference color angle.

The gain values determine the amplitude of the decoded color differences, and are determined by the magnitudes of the basis vectors:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As with angles, two of these gain values can be customized as adjusting the third is redundant with overall saturation. Because of this, the gain values are sometimes specified as ratios against either the B-Y or R-Y gain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Color clamping

The standard color matrices will produce colors that are outside of the RGB color cube, and in particular negative color values. These should generally be hard clamped to zero, without luminance compensation or soft clamping. A contemporary CRT display neither had delay memory for carrying such negative colors across scan lines nor could produce negative light through its CRT tube, so the negative values were simply clamped to black. This necessarily produces hue shifts for colors with very low luminance values, which is representative of such displays. In a 256 color chart, this manifests as sine-wave shaped artifacts on the left and the right where the colors intersect the RGB cube and the hues are shifted by the clamping.

Some modern displays may show effects where some of these negative colors are partially preserved. This has the most impact with alternating GTIA mode 9/11 line displays in APAC-like modes, which ordinarily look dull on NTSC due to negative colors being lost on the dark mode 11 lines, but appear with full colors on some devices. This is caused by comb filters or downsampling filters within the device working in U-V, I-Q, or RGB-Y space and allowing negative colors to be blended before clamping. Video capture devices will also cause this effect when configured to capture with a format that has vertical chroma subsampling, such as 4:2:0 YCbCr (YV12) or 4:1:0 YCbCr (I420). This can sometimes be avoided by capturing in a format with full chroma resolution, such as RGB or 4:2:2 YCbCr (YUY2/UYVY).

Over-bright colors are more troublesome and hard clamping typically produces objectionable color shifts, particularly ugly yellows. Tone mapping techniques like soft clamping typically produce bland results. The only generally good way to deal with excessively bright colors is to reduce the overall contrast to bring them within the RGB gamut without distorting the color palette. Raising the overall brightness of the display is therefore beneficial to faithful reproduction of NTSC colors. However, this is often a compromise since the overall color levels need to be brought down as low as white=70% to avoid clipping, which is generally too dim unless the monitor brightness is increased.

The purely correct way to reduce color intensity is in linear color, which requires converting from sRGB or NTSC to linear RGB, scaling there, and then converting to sRGB. Practically, colors can be scaled imperceptably directly in sRGB space. This convenient cheat works because sRGB's transfer function is close to gamma 2.2

and the scaling constant can be factored out to allow the conversions between gamma and linear color to cancel:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the reduced color intensity to have benefit, it must be done on extended color values. Scaling down color values that have already been clamped to 1 has no benefit as the extra saturation has already been lost.

## Monochrome displays

Color signals can also be displayed on a monochrome display. This may be tinted bluish-white, amber, or green, but in all cases the display is produced by displaying the signal as luminance only without color decoding. This results in the 3.58MHz chroma subcarrier being visible to some extent, within the bandwidth and resolution limits of the display.

That the display neither reproduces nor decodes the chroma signal, however, does not mean that it is not visible. It is still visible as a haze or blurriness on the displayed picture, since the 3.58MHz chroma subcarrier is somewhat reproduced as an alternating pixel pattern on the display. The effect depends on the bandwidth and resolution of the display. High resolutions displays will simply reproduce the subcarrier as a striped pattern, while lower resolution displays will filter it somewhat. The subcarrier has no luma component if averaged at the signal level, but it does have a luma component if averaged in the display due to the non-linear encoding of the signal and averaging in light producing a different result than averaging in the signal.

The luminance change from the color signal can be simulated by converting the peak signal values to linear space, averaging the linear values, and converting back to gamma space. For instance, given a chroma signal with 40% amplitude relative to luma 15, displayed on top of luma 8 and using a gamma of 2.2, gives the following peak values:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is somewhat brighter than the pure luma 8 value of 8/15 = 0.533. However, this only applies for an infinite bandwidth decoder and averaging purely in light on the display; the actual value would likely be lower in practice due to some signal attenuation, which would be done on the gamma-encoded signal. The average effective luma is also higher for darker colors because of clamping in the display, which cannot produce negative light for the signal peaks below black.

