## D.3 NTSC artifacting

Hires pixels of alternating intensity produce a signal with a component at the color subcarrier frequency. This component is indistinguishable to the display from a regular color signal and produces color in the same manner. The color produced is determined by the relative offset from the luminance pixels and the color subcarrier, which varies based on the computer model. Neither the luminance pixels nor the color signal produced by GTIA are clean sine waves, but only the phase of the sinusoidal component at 3.58MHz matches.

## Luma/chroma separation

Because artifacting is the result of luma/chroma crosstalk, luma/chroma separation must be simulated in order to simulate artifacting. There are several strategies for separating luma and chroma from the composite signal.

One way to separate the signals is by frequency, using a bandpass filter centered at 3.58MHz to isolate chroma and the inverse, a notch reject filter, to isolate luma. A difficulty with this approach is selecting a good bandpass filter that doesn't result in excessive blurring of luma, especially when the filter has too shallow of a rolloff. Simply selecting a filter with sharp frequency response is not enough, as such a filter will also be very long in the time domain and have huge horizontal ringing artifacts.

There are a couple of ways to improve the quality of the separated luma. First, the luma and chroma filters should be matched so that there is no signal loss between them. This is most easily accomplished by subtracting the chroma from the composite signal to produce luma, equivalent to ensuring that the luma and chroma filters are perfect inverses. 93 Second, a post-separation peaking filter can be used that has increased gain around 3.58MHz, to combat attenuation of frequency components around the chroma subcarrier. This is a common option in NTSC decoding chips.

Modern decoders often use a comb filter to improve Y/C separation. A 1D comb filter works only horizontally or vertically, a 2D comb filter both horizontally and vertically within a frame, and a 3D comb filter also incorporates filters from adjacent frames (temporal axis). Comb filters can either use fixed or adaptive coefficients, the latter better able to deal with motion. The signal produced by ANTIC and GTIA invalidates traditional comb filters since the horizontal and frame periods are integral multiples of the color subcarrier, preventing the subcarrier from alternating phase and producing the checkerboard patterns targeted by the comb filter.

## Chroma demodulation

The chroma signal must be further demodulated into components for input into the color decoding matrix. Either I-Q or U-V axes can be decoded, with appropriate adjustments to the decoding matrix. This is typically done by multiplying the signal by sine and cosine waves and applying a low-pass filter to the result.

Choosing the right sampling rate and phase can make demodulation easier. In particular, using a sampling rate of 4 × f sc = 14.3 MHz and aligned to the color burst reference aligns the samples to the peaks of the sine and cosine waves in the repeating pattern -U, +V, +U, -V. Similarly, delaying by 57° gives +I, +Q, -I, -Q. This makes demodulation easier and also low-pass filtering, as it is easier to avoid beat patterns from imperfect filtering.

It is also possible to demodulate the RGB color differences by sampling at the peaks for R-Y, G-Y, and B-Y instead of I/Q or U/V. Evaluating the color differences with the modulated forms of I and Q to produce the encoding equations gives the phase angles:

[93] This is also referred to as a pair of complementary filters , where the transfer functions of the two filters sum to one, and the components removed by one filter exactly match those kept by the other.

Table 118: Measured artifacting delays

| Model   | Estimated offset (+/- 5 ns)   | Hue delta (+/- 5°)   |
|---------|-------------------------------|----------------------|
| 800     | 0.132 us                      | 170°                 |
| 800XL   | 0.251 us                      | 323°                 |
| 130XE   | 0.185 us                      | 238°                 |

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is essentially U-V decoding for the (B-Y) and (R-Y) components, differing only in the recovery of (G-Y) by direct demodulation. When working with discrete samples, this is less convenient than matrix decoding of (G-Y) from (B-Y) and (R-Y).

Finally, it is possible to demodulate RGB directly, by converting the color matrix into demodulation phase offsets:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is not recommended, though, since this mixes luma and chroma together, and the low pass filtering needed results in unacceptably poor quality luma.

## Luma/chroma signal synthesis

The luma signal is produced by a filtered version of a square pulse, with a width of 1/3.58MHz = 279ns for a lores pixel and half that at 140ns for a hires pixel. The sharpness of the pulse determines not only the crispness of the pixels but also the strength of chroma artifacts at edges. The pulse is not a perfect rectangular pulse in practice and this attenuates chroma edge artifacts.

The chroma signal is formed similarly, except that the pixel pulses are also multiplied by the appropriate phaseshifted chroma subcarrier. The most straightforward way is to generate the sine wave directly with the required phase offset, rather than computing and modulating I and Q, which ends up being equivalent. Technically GTIA does not actually generate a sinewave, but rather a phase shifted square wave which is then (very) crudely filtered. This does not seem to be significant in practice due to the low bandwidth of the chroma signal.

Afterward, the luma and chroma signals can be combined to produce the composite signal, which is then demodulated to regenerate luma and chroma, but with the appropriate crosstalk to produce artifacting effects.

## Filtering implementation

All filtering operations must take place in NTSC gamma space and not linear color, since this is how NTSC

encoding is specified.

Because all of the operations listed so far are linear operations, some significant shortcuts can be taken in impementation. It is not actually needed to generate a composite signal, as the luma and chroma signals can be demodulated and filtered separately, producing luma-to-luma, luma-to-chroma, chroma-to-luma, and chroma-tochroma signals. This is convenient given the hue-brightness separation inherent in GTIA and produces equivalent results. Also, this allows for some of the crosstalk effects to be attenuated if desired, with the chromato-luma crosstalk being the least desirable. Combining this with the brightness-to-luma and hue-to-chroma conversions at the front and the color matrix at the back produces streamlined brightness-to-RGB and hue-toRGB transforms, dramatically reducing the number of filtering steps.

The types of filters used has impact on the visual attractiveness of the output. In particular, linear phase filters give a more modern look as they are only truly possible with digital signal processing, producing ringing artifacts that are centered around the originating pixels. Older CRTs used analog filters that had phase shifts, with ringing artifacts extending mainly forward in time, to the right in the picture. For simulating this, either IIR filters or truncated IIR filters converted to FIR filters are preferable. These do not have to be very long -- at a 14MHz dot clock (double hires), filters in the 12-16 point range are adequate, with longer filters either being lost in roundoff or producing unnaturally long ringing artifacts.

Figure 25: Altirra NTSC high artifacting pipeline

<!-- image -->

The 8-bit GTIA color is first split into hue and brightness fields. The brightness field is multiplied by the luma pulse shape with one hires pixel width, while the hue drives the phase of an oscillator running at 3.58MHz, the output of which is multiplied by a chroma pulse shape with one lores pixel width. The luma and chroma pulses are added and then fed into the luma and chroma stages. In the luma stage, a notch filter isolates the luma signal. In the chroma stages, the signal is multiplied by sine and cosine waves and then low-pass filtered to extract U and V. The Y, U, and V signals are then resampled from 4×f sc to 2×f sc , or hires pixel rate, processed through a decoding matrix to produce R-Y, G-Y, and B-Y color differences, and added to Y to produce R, G, and B signals. These are stored in a precomputed table of impulse responses for all 256 palette colors × 2 horizontal phases, for each of red/green/blue outputs.

To produce the output line, the the incoming palette indices and H/V phases are used to select impulses from the precomputed tables, which are then added into shift registers for R, G, and B. The outputs from the shift registers are interleaved to produce the final RGB pixels.

