## D.4 PAL color encoding

## Phase alternation

One of the main distinctions between NTSC and PAL is the use of alternating phase direction to cancel phase errors between lines, suppressing hue shift artifacts. This is done by inverting the V axis on each scanline, so that even scanlines use opposite phases for the same colors as even lines. Doing so also causes phase errors to reverse direction, which can then be canceled between adjacent lines.

There are two main ways that contemporary displays handled this cancellation. One is to use a delay line to

carry the chroma from one scan line to the next, averaging the previous scan line's chroma with that of the current scan line. This results in the well-known artifact of color being carried over between alternating GTIA mode 9 and mode 11 lines, along with a general blurring and half scan line shift down of chroma. Note that only chroma is averaged and not luma. Averaging the separated chroma signal, the demodulated U and V signals, or the decoded RGB values from a UV-to-RGB linear decoder matrix are equivalent for this.

The other common method is simply to ignore the issue and decode chroma for each scan line separately, as with NTSC. This preserves full chroma resolution but shows alternating color stripes when the chroma isn't matched between even and odd scan lines.

## The swinging color burst

As with the NTSC system, the PAL GTIA uses hue 1 to also generate the PAL color burst, making this color invariant to the computer color adjustment on PAL systems as well. The color burst is more complicated in the PAL system, however, which causes additional complication and sources of error in the PAL GTIA.

In NTSC, the color burst is consistently generated along the -U axis at 180° in U-V space. In order to identify scan lines that have V inverted, however, PAL uses a swinging color burst that changes reference angles on even and odd scan lines between 135° and 225°. This means that in addition to changing the phase direction for successive hues, the PAL GTIA must also encode an additional 90° phase shift.

The 45° difference between the NTSC and PAL subcarriers in U-V space means that hue 1 is encoded as a different color by the NTSC and PAL GTIAs. In NTSC, the 180° angle produces a yellow-green color with a standard reference decoder, while the 135° or reflected 225° angle in PAL produces an orange color. This results in one of the notorious differences in NTSC and PAL color encoding when viewed with a modern display.

## Phase encoding

The NTSC GTIA generates different phases for hues by successively delaying the reference subcarrier signal through a delay line. The PAL GTIA's phase encoding is more complex due to needing to support V-axis inversion, the swinging color subcarrier, and approximating the original NTSC phase angles with the higher frequency PAL color subcarrier. This is still done with only a single reference color subcarrier signal input, so the internal delays must be changed on alternating scan lines.

An important clue to the internal functioning of the PAL GTIA is given by the behavior of the color adjustment pot. On an NTSC system, turning the pot to one extreme causes the phase delay to drop to zero, causing all hues to shift to match hue 1. On a PAL system, this produces two bands of opposite orange and blue colors, revealing the existence of an inverter in the color signal path that produces a fixed 180° shift. The inverter is active for hues 3-9 and 4-10 depending on the V polarity. Hues 3 and 10 use different inverter settings for even and odd scan lines, which results in them losing color with the color delay reduced to zero due to averaging of opposing chroma vectors.

There are two other visual anomalies from the color adjustment providing additional insight. Hues 1 and 15 are also always the same regardless of the color adjustment, which reduces the number of unique hues to 14, and there is uneven spacing between colors that results in some noticeable divisions between hues. This is a result of conflicting requirements, the need to produce seven hues out of 180° from the delay line and also provide a 90° delay between two of the delay line taps to accommodate the swinging color burst.

The solution used in the PAL GTIA is to prioritize the accuracy of the swinging color burst, using four delay taps to provide the 90° spacing, and sacrifice hue accuracy by using uneven phase steps for successive hues. This guarantees two discontinuities in the color wheel, one for each 180° half. The wide jumps are between hues 6/7 and hues 10/11. The required delay is 22.5° per delay tap, which also allows the differing even/odd encodings for hues 3 and 10 to align to the same color angle.

## Imperfect color adjustments

The previous discussion assumes that the color adjustment is set to produce an ideal delay. In practice, the actual delay differs from this ideal, not only due to imperfect adjustment but also intentionally for aesthetic reasons: the ideal adjustment produces a sea-green Graphics 0 screen. Screenshots of the color palette from actual PAL systems commonly show a more conventional bluish Gr.0 screen while still showing standard orange for hue 1, indicating a narrower phase delay more in the 18-19° range. The altered adjustment adds additional discontinuity bands in the hue spectrum at the inverter switch points at hues 3/4 and hues 9/10.

The resulting colors depend upon the response of the display to the non-90° angle between the swinging color subcarriers. In one interpretation, this deviation is ignored and the even/odd color subcarriers are mapped to 135° in U-V color space. This produces consistent color for hue 1 and between even/odd lines, with the exception of hues 3 and 10. Other decoders handle this differently and show striped colors for solid hue bars.

