## D.5 PAL artifacting

## Chroma blending

The adjacent scan line chroma blending performed by many PAL displays is conceptually done in U-V space, but other color spaces can be used. Since the blending operation is just a simple average that is a linear operation, it can be done in any other color space that is related to U-V by a linear transform. This includes I-Q, but the RGB-Y color difference space is particularly convenient:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, the color difference values can be averaged with the previous scan line and the luminance for the current scan line added afterward, allowing for a fast implementation without multiplies or dot products.

For accurate results, the blend must be done with unclamped colors -- it should not be done on colors that have already been converted to RGB in [0, 1] range. An efficient workaround is to store extended range RGBY with the range [-0.5, +1.5] mapped to 0-255, from which the following can be computed:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This permits leveraging fast pixel averaging operations typically available for video motion prediction operations (PAVGB in SSE2, VRHADD in NEON).

These RGB blending operations must be done in gamma space and not linear color, for equivalence with U-V blending and also because the source colors can be impossible -- negative color values in non-linear RGB encoding have no equivalent in linear RGB.

V inversion does not need to be taken into account when performing this blending, as it has already been removed by the chroma demodulation stage before this blending occurs.

Note that chroma blending in this manner results in more than 256 total colors and colors with variable levels of saturation. This means that an 8-bit indexed color pixmap cannot store the blended result. Algorithms that only target APAC modes may work around this by copying GTIA hue and luminance values between mode 9 and 11 lines; this produces an oversaturated picture and does not generalize to other modes.

## Hires artifacting

Hires pixel patterns produce false colors with PAL as with NTSC, though the effect is harder to use due to the PAL chroma subcarrier frequency. Unlike NTSC, where alternating pixels are sufficient, the PAL subcarrier advances by 5/8 ths of a cycle per hires pixel and thus requires an 8-pixel pattern horizontally to produce a consistent color.

Simulating PAL hires artifacting is conceptually similar to NTSC, but with a bit more complexity. With NTSC, only two filter banks are required, for even and odd pixels. The PAL chroma subcarrier advances by 5/8 ths of a cycle per hires pixel instead of half a cycle, which requires filter banks for eight horizontal phases instead of two. This may again be doubled to 16 banks for V inversion, depending on the implementation.

Figure 26: Altirra PAL high artifacting pipeline

<!-- image -->

The 8-bit GTIA color is first split into hue and brightness fields. The brightness field is multiplied by the luma pulse shape with one hires pixel width, while the hue drives the phase of an oscillator running at 4.47MHz, the output of which is multiplied by a chroma pulse shape with one lores pixel width. The luma and chroma pulses are added and then fed into the luma and chroma stages. In the luma stage, a notch filter isolates the luma signal. In the chroma stages, the signal is multiplied by sine and cosine waves and then low-pass filtered to extract U and V. The Y, U, and V signals are then resampled with a 4-tap cubic filter from 4×f sc to 1.6×f sc , or hires pixel rate. These are stored in a precomputed table of impulse responses for all 256 palette colors × 8 horizontal phases × 2 vertical phases.

To produce the output line, the the incoming palette indices and H/V phases are used to select impulses from the precomputed tables, which are then added into shift registers for Y, R-Y, and B-Y. The R-Y and B-Y differences are averaged with the previous line and then combined in a matrix to produce G-Y. Adding the color differences to Y gives the final RGB output.

