## D.6 Synchronization

## Interlace

ANTIC is not able to produce true interlaced timing, as its video timing is hardcoded to 262 or 312 lines per field and there is no known way to introduce half-line shifts to increase this to the necessary 262.5 or 312.5 lines. However, the last-line-hires bug can introduce some changes into the video signal that can still fool some displays into displaying an interlaced signal.

Older CRT displays depend upon the shift in timing between horizontal sync and vertical sync between upper and lower fields to shift the beam scanning patterns of the two fields away from each other by half a line. This is not possible with ANTIC since there are a whole number of lines per field. It is possible to alter the vertical sync

by enabling playfield DMA to 'trim' it, but this has no real effect since it just introduces jitter that is averaged out by the vertical sync detector. Thus, it does not appear possible to enable interlace on an old monitor like a Commodore 1702.

Newer displays that use digital processing, however, tend to deliberately detect the field polarity instead of letting the video timing directly drive the beam. These can be more easily convinced to display interlace. The method of field polarity detection varies, however. Examples that are documented:

- The LM1881 Video Sync Separator looks for equalization pulses at the start of vertical blank and counts them to determine whether an even or odd number of half-lines has occurred before the start of vertical sync.
- The Phillips SAA7114 Video Decoder checks whether the end of vertical sync aligns with the pulses generated by the horizontal sync oscillator.
- The Analog Devices AD9880 Analog/HDMI Dual Display Interface and Harris HMP8112 NTSC/PAL Video Decoder check whether the start of vertical sync aligns with horizontal sync.

Additionally complicating this is that some displays don't use sync to detect whether a signal is interlaced or not; they simply always combine adjacent fields and rely on adaptive deinterlacing to reduce artifacts with a progressive signal. This can be detected by whether displaying a graphic alternating at field rate without any sync tricks results in a finely striped static pattern at double vertical resolution. When this happens, the display is essentially guessing the field order when it can't detect it, and the displayed image may have the fields swapped.

