## 13.3 Controller

The 5200 controller consists of an analog stick, a pair of top/bottom buttons, a 9-digit pad with # and * buttons, and Start/Reset/Pause buttons. Depending on the model, either two or four controllers can be attached to the system unit.

## Multiplexing

The key pad and top button of all controllers are multiplexed and bits 0-1 of CONSOL select the controller to read. The bottom button and analog stick have dedicated inputs per controller and are not affected.

## Analog stick

The analog stick is composed of a pair of potentiometers hooked up to pairs of POTx lines on POKEY. Even POT lines correspond to horizontal sticks, with lower values indicating left direction and higher values indicating right direction. Similarly, odd POT lines correspond to vertical, with lower to upper values meaning up to down placement.

Famously, the 5200 controller's analog stick does not auto-center, and thus the center position must be determined in software. Common techniques for doing this include periodically reading the joystick position between waves or levels and taking the average of min/max measured positions as the center. A correctly functioning controller is guaranteed to have a side-to-side range of at least 160 counts in the corresponding POTx register. 83

Bit 2 of CONSOL must be set in order for the analog joystick to read properly. Clearing it cuts power to the potentiometers, causing the POTx registers to instead register the maximum value of 228 ($E4). This line also doubles as the calibration control line for the trackball and as a trackball detection mechanism. 84

## Keypad

The keypads for all four controllers are multiplexed onto the keyboard scanning lines of POKEY. The low two bits of CONSOL select the controller to read, with 00 selecting controller #1, 01 selecting #2, etc. From the selected controller, the twelve buttons and the three game control buttons are mapped onto KBCODE bits 1-4 as follows:

| 1 1111   | 2 1110   | 3 1101   | Start 1100   |
|----------|----------|----------|--------------|
| 4 1011   | 5 1010   | 6 1001   | Pause 1000   |
| 7 0111   | 8 0110   | 9 0101   | Reset 0100   |
| * 0011   | 0 0010   | # 0001   |              |

The K0 and K5 output lines are not used, causing POKEY to detect each pressed key two times during each keyboard scan. For instance, holding down the 0 key will cause key values $04, $05, $24 and $25 to be detected.

[83] [AHS03a] p. 25.

[84] [AHS03a] p. 21.

The keyboard debounce feature (SKCTL bit 0) must be disabled in order to detect a key press. If it is enabled, the keyboard logic will see the redundant keyboard mappings as multiple pressed keys and will never report a key press in SKSTAT, KBCODE, or IRQST. Disabling debounce also prevents POKEY from properly detecting a held key, however, and therefore in this mode each pressed key will be reported every 32 scan lines (~490Hz). If debounce is quickly enabled within one scan line after the key is reported, however, the keyboard logic will properly wait until the key is released before reporting any other key presses.

## Triggers

There are two trigger buttons on the 5200 controller, an upper trigger and a lower trigger. The bottom button of each controller is wired to TRIG0-TRIG3, depending on the controller, and functions the same as a joystick button on the 8-bit computer line. The top button is instead wired to the KR2 line of POKEY, which causes it to register as the SHIFT, CONTROL, and BREAK keys on the scanned keyboard. This means that it will trigger a break IRQ (IRQST bit 7) as well as show up in the top two bits of KBCODE if a key pad button is pressed.

