## 5.2 Initialization

## Power-up state

POKEY does not have a RESET line and therefore powers up in indeterminate state. Although various circuits within the chip are biased toward particular states from a cold start, the initial state is not guaranteed and may include interrupts being enabled in IRQEN and asserted in IRQST. Thus, IRQEN must be reset prior to clearing the I bit on the CPU to avoid stray IRQs.

## Initialization mode

Bits 0 and 1 of SKCTL normally control the keyboard scan and debounce features. However, clearing both of those bits also activates another initialization function, which resets various clocks and state machines throughout the chip. The following logic circuits are reset:

- 15KHz clock
- 64KHz clock
- 4-bit and 5-bit polynomial noise generators
- 9/17-bit polynomial noise generator (which includes RANDOM)
- Serial port input state machine and shift register
- Serial port output state machine
- The SEROUT valid flip-flop
- Keyboard scan (due to clearing bit 1)

These circuits are held in reset state until initialization mode is exited. For instance, while SKCTL bits 0 and 1 are both cleared, any sound/timer channels using the 15KHz or 64KHz clocks will not count, as those clocks will be frozen, and RANDOM will lock at $FF.

Initialization mode does not reset:

- Interrupt enable (IRQEN) or status (IRQST)
- KBCODE
- SERIN
- AUDF1-4, AUDC1-4, or AUDCTL
- Timer counters
- Audio channel outputs
- Pot scan (although the pot scan will be suspended until init mode is ended, due to the frozen 15KHz clock)
- The output of the serial output shifter, including the bit sent out the SIO DATA OUT line and driving twotone mode

## Serial port reset

Setting the serial clock selection bits SKCTL (bits 4-6) to 0 resets the serial port clocking circuitry (but not the shift registers). Therefore, SKCTL should be set to $00 to initialize all POKEY functions.

## Clock reset timing

The initialization function can be used to reset the 15KHz and 64KHz clocks to known offsets in the scan line. As long as init mode has been enabled long enough for both clocks to reset fully, the clock offsets will be determined by when init mode is exited. However, the design of the clocks causes the clocks to be reset to partway through their cycles instead of the beginning.

Both clocks are polynomial counters with truncated cycles. The 15KHz clock is a 7-bit XNOR counter with a polynomial of `x^7+x^6+1`. On a pattern of %1001001 (shifting left), a '1' bit is forced and a pulse emitted. This occurs 78 cycles after the reset state of %0000000. The 64KHz clock is a 5-bit XOR counter with polynomial `x^5+x^3+1` and a forced '1' bit on %00010, occurring 19 cycles after the reset state of %11111. If IRQs are enabled for unlinked timers using these clocks with period 0, the IRQ is asserted in IRQST 83 and 24 cycles after the write to SKCTL that clears init mode.

