## 5.3 Sound generation

POKEY has four audio channels with individual timers and audio output circuitry. Each channel has an associated frequency register (AUDF1-4) and control register (AUDC1-4). In addition, there is a shared control register (AUDCTL) for common functions.

## Countdown timers

Each channel has an 8-bit countdown timer associated with it to produce clocking pulses. The period for each timer is set by the AUDFx register, specifying a divisor from 1 ($00) to 256 ($FF). The countdown timer produces a pulse each time it underflows and resets, which can then be used to drive an interrupt, the serial port, or sound generation.

By default, timers use the default audio clock, which is selected by AUDCTL bit 0. Setting this bit to 0 selects the 64KHz clock, while setting it to 1 selects the 15KHz clock. It is not possible to use both the 15KHz and 64KHz clocks at the same time, even on different timers. In addition, timers 1 and 3 can be switched to the fast 1.79MHz clock through AUDCTL bits 6 and 5.

## Timer period

For timers running at 1.8MHz with AUDFx = N, the period of the timer is N+4 cycles. +1 of this is because the counter is reloaded on underflow and thus must count below $00. The other +3 is because of three cycles of delay from the counter being split into multiple stages and for the underflow logic.

For timers using the 15KHz or 64KHz clock, the period is (N+1)*114 cycles for the 15KHz clock and (N+1)*28 cycles for the 64KHz clock. The three cycles of delay do not matter in this case because they are absorbed by the delay until the next audio clock pulse, which occurs 114 or 28 cycles from the last pulse regardless of how long the audio timer takes to reset. This also results in different timers using the same clock synchronizing to the nearest 15KHz or 64KHz tick.

Some references show an additional factor of two in the relation between timer AUDF1-4 value and the frequency. This is because in the common divide-by-two mode (distortion 10), each timer period causes the output to toggle. The frequency of the resulting square wave is thus half the rate at which the timer underflows. For instance, the closest NTSC AUDF value to play a 440Hz tone with the 64KHz clock is 72. This results in the timer generating pulses at a rate of 1.79MHz ÷ (73 × 28) = 875.6Hz. Two pulses are required to generate a cycle, so the resulting square wave is half that at 437.8Hz. A similar divide-by-two is seen with the serial port, which also requires two clock pulses per bit. However, the undivided rate is relevant for other uses of the timer, such as IRQ generation and the noise sampling distortion modes.

## Linked timers

Setting bit 4 of AUDCTL links timers 1 and 2 so that timer 2 is clocked using the output of timer 1, and similarly, bit 3 links timers 3 and 4 together. This merges the pair of counters into a 16-bit counter, by making the following changes:

- The automatic reload on underflow is suppressed on the low timer.
- The normal clock input to the high timer is replaced by the low timer output, so the high timer only counts when the low timer underflows.
- When the high timer underflows, both the low and high timer counters are reloaded together.

Typically, linking is used with the 1.8MHz clock on the low timer to achieve a high-precision timer. However, it can also be used with the 15KHz and 64KHz clocks. The high timer - timer 2 or 4 - is the one that has the combined period and is the one that should be enabled for audio, IRQs, or serial port clocking.

For the 15KHz and 64KHz clocks, the period of the linked timer is (N+1)*114 or (N+1)*28, where N = AUDF1 + AUDF2*256 or AUDF3 + AUDF4*256. When the 1.79MHz clock is used, the period is N+7 cycles. This is three cycles greater than for an unlinked timer due to increased delay for the timers to reset, since low timer must underflow before the high timer can underflow, and only then can both reset. As with unlinked timers, this delay is effectively hidden when the 15/64KHz clocks are used.

Linking occurs prior to the audio circuitry and thus the waveform settings for the low channel have no effect on the clocking of the high channel. Normally, the low audio channel is muted and only the high channel is used. However, it can also be reused for volume-only effects or even enabled for special effects without affecting the high channel.

## Linked timer fire timing

While linked timers are intended to be used as a single high-precision timer, both channels are still active and in particular the low channel still sends clocking pulses to the output circuitry. Because linking disables the normal reload for the low channel, it first counts down and underflows from its initial period and then continues to count down and underflow every 256 ticks after that until the high timer also underflows and resets both timers. For instance, with a 16-bit period of $0140, the low timer will fire after counting down from $40, then again after

another 256 ticks. The high timer in turn counts down from $01 to $00 after the first underflow and then to $FF after the second underflow, after which both timers are quickly reset. The reset of both counters does not cause the low timer to fire again. As a result, the low timer in a linked pair will fire AUDF2+1 or AUDF4+1 times for each time the high timer fires.

The high timer underflows and fires three cycles after the low timer does at the end of each high timer cycle, with a corresponding three cycle delay for changes to the audio output or interrupt status.

## Distortion (waveform) selection

Bits 4-7 of AUDCx control the waveform used by the audio circuitry for a channel. This allows each channel to produce a flat level (no output), a square wave, or a more complex wave driven by the polynomial noise generators.

Bit 4 enables volume-only mode. When set, the waveform output is overridden and hardwired on at the output. None of the other distortion bits affect the audio output in this mode, though they still do affect hidden state in the audio circuitry, as the clocking and noise circuits still run but just don't have an effect on the audio output.

Bit 5 selects either noise (0) or a square wave (1). When the square wave is enabled, each time the timer expires and the output circuitry is clocked, the output toggles, resulting in a square wave with a frequency half that of the timer. When noise is enabled, bit 6 selects either the 9/17-bit generator (0) or the 4-bit generator (1).

Bit 7 controls the sampling mode. If it is set, the timer output directly clocks the output waveform. If it is cleared, however, the 5-bit generator masks out some of the clock pulses, omitting pulses that would cause the output to toggle or sample the 4/9/17-bit noise generators. This gives a rougher, uneven sound that is different than the other generators.

Table 8: Distortion modes

| AUDCx[7:4]          | Output                     |
|---------------------|----------------------------|
| 0000 (0)            | Poly-5 clocked poly-9/17   |
| 0010 (2) 0110 (6)   | Poly-5 clocked square wave |
| 0100 (4)            | Poly-5 clocked poly-4      |
| 1000 (8)            | Poly-9/17                  |
| 1010 (10) 1110 (14) | Square wave                |
| 1100 (12)           | Poly-4                     |
| xxx1                | Volume-only                |

The distortion mode setting has no effect on timer IRQs or serial port clocking, and the results of the distortion setting are not observable by the 6502.

## Noise sampling artifacts

In POKEY, all channels share a common set of psuedo-random noise generators that all run at machine clock rate. Noise is generated for each channel by sampling the output of the generator at the channel's rate, with a long period (lower pitch) causing channels to skip more bits in the noise output between each sample. This differs from the 2600's TIA where each channel has a dedicated noise circuit generating bits at the channel rate. POKEY's sampling behavior can result in undesirable patterns due to interactions between the periods of the noise generators and the channel timers. This happens when the two periods have a common factor.

For instance, the 4-bit generator has a period of 15 bits. An audio channel with a period of P cycles will sample the output of this generator every P cycles, or equivalently advance within the pattern every (P mod 15) bits. If the period is divisible by 15, the same bit in the pattern will be sampled each time and no sound will occur. With the 4-bit generator, N=15, and thus this occurs whenever the period is a multiple of 15 cycles.

For timer periods that aren't divisible by the noise period, artifacts will still occur if the two periods share a common factor. This occurs because advancing by (P mod N) bits will only visit a subset of the bits. Given an audio channel using the 64KHz clock and AUDFx=$CC, P=5740 and (P mod 15)=10, so it advances 10 bits at a time. As a result, only three bits of the pattern will ever be used.

The three bits that are used, however, will depend upon the timing offset of the channel relative to the noise pattern. This will tend to change whenever a sound is played, and the different sets of bits used will change the timbre of the output. The 4-bit generator's 15 bit pattern is 000111011001010, so sampling it every 10 bits gives the following possibilities: 001, 010, 001, 111, and 100. Four of these are similar, but one of them is a constant 1 bit -- giving a 1-in-5 chance that this configuration gives no sound.

Note that these interactions are based on the period in cycles , not ticks of the audio clock. When using the 15KHz or 64KHz audio clock, an AUDFx value of (F+1) divisible by N will produce silence, but other values can as well. As an sample, using AUDFx=$48 gives a period of 73 audio ticks, which is not divisible by the 9-bit generator's period of 511 bits. However, when combined with the 64KHz clock, the period in cycles is 73*28 = 2044 cycles. Since 2044 = 511*4, the result is silent.

This problem can be avoided by using a period in cycles that is relatively prime to the period of the noise generator, ensuring that all bits in the noise pattern are used and guaranteeing that the output is not constant. Always using period values that result in the same (P mod N) value will also guarantee that the sampled pattern is the same and avoid changing the timbre of the resulting sound. With the 1.8MHz clock, the period can also be detuned slightly to always advance the noise pattern by one bit each period, mimicking the TIA's behavior.

## Volume control

Bits 0-3 of AUDCx control the volume level for a channel, from 0 (silent) to 15 (maximum volume). The volume level only matters if the channel output is currently a 1; if it is a 0, then there will be no output from the channel regardless of the volume level.

The output from each channel is biased, producing either zero or a negative voltage depending on the channel's volume level. Thus, increasing the volume also increases the average DC bias in the output, and changing the volume can result in audible stepping noise. However, if the channel's digital output is 0, there will be no difference in the analog output regardless of volume level.

The 4-bit DAC for each channel also has somewhat mismatched outputs for each bit. In particular, the ratios between the drivers for the lower two volume bits don't quite match the ratios for the higher two bits, resulting the gaps between volume levels 3 and 4, 7 and 8, and 11 and 12 being a bit wider than expected.

In addition, the mixed output from all four channels starts to show non-linear saturation effects at higher total volume levels. The output is nearly linear within the range of a single channel, where the volume sum of channels with an active output is 15 or less. However, the remainder of the range 16-60 is only about double the amplitude, and two channels actively outputting at volume 15 only achieve about 50% higher amplitude than a single channel. This has the effect of compressing the output, amplifying quieter sounds and attenuating louder ones. Also, because of the previously mentioned biased output from each channel, a channel that is producing a constant 1 bit at non-zero volume can distort the output by shifting the audio output into the saturation range. A channel with constant output 0, however, contributes no distortion regardless of its volume level.

## Volume-only mode

Bit 4 of AUDC1-4 activates volume-only mode for a channel. This causes the channel output to be forced to a 1, ignoring the output of the timer, noise generators, and high-pass logic, and only producing sound based on the volume set by bits 0-3 of AUDCx. This is often used for playback of digital sound effects at 4-bit/sample

precision.

Note that because the volume-only mode is enforced after the high-pass logic, the normal inversion of channels 1 and 2 relative to 3 and 4 doesn't apply to this mode; volume-only channels will add in any combination.

Volume-only mode overrides the output of but does not disable the high-pass or noise flip-flops, which will continue to sample the noise patterns and high-pass sources.

## High-pass filter

Channels 1 and 2 have a high-pass filter which is enabled by bits 2 and 1 of AUDCTL, respectively. This uses channel 3 or 4 to clock a high-pass flip-flop that captures the output of the lower channel and XORs against it, canceling the output back to a 0 whenever the higher channel ticks. This zeroes part of the lower channel's output, acting as a crude high-pass filter.

The high-pass signal path routes from the clock output of the high channel's countdown timer to an XOR immediately before the volume-only override and DAC on the low channel. Thus, the high-pass effect will stack with any noise and volume settings on the low-channel, but is overridden by volume-only mode. None of the AUDC3/4 bits on the high channel affect high-pass operation. They will still affect the high channel's audio output, which is usually set to volume 0 to mute it when using ch3/4 to drive the high-pass filter.

When the high-pass filter is disabled, the high-pass flip-flop is forced to a 1, but the XOR still takes place. This causes the digital output from channels 1 and 2 to be inverted. Normally this isn't noticeable, but it can show up when two channels play synchronized sound. If channels 1 and 2 are set to the same frequency and to pure tone mode, they will add, but if the same is done with channels 1 and 3, they will cancel. This doesn't happen in volume-only mode, however, as the gates that force volume-only mode are after the high-pass circuitry and therefore volume-only channels always add in any combination.

The high-pass update path has about 1.5 cycles of delay from the high channel's clock to the low channel's XOR output. If channels 1 and 3 have their timers synchronized to a period of P cycles and channel 3 is running two cycles ahead of channel 1, a half cycle pulse will be produced per period. The half-cycle offset makes it impossible for the high-pass filter to completely cancel the lower channel's output.

Despite its name, the high-pass circuit does not behave like a conventional high-pass filter and has a complex effect on the output frequency spectrum. Similarly to adding sine waves, the high-pass output often has strong components at the sum and difference of the two channel frequencies. With square wave output on the low channel, this results in a varied duty cycle at double the frequency when the channel frequencies are the same, or a pulse width approximation to a sawtooth when they are slightly different.

For instance, with channels 1 and 3 at 1.79MHz (NTSC) with AUDF1=$3B and AUDF3=$3C, the frequencies of the timers are 1.78977MHz ÷ (59 + 4) = 28409.1Hz and 1.78977MHz ÷ (60 + 4) = 27965.2Hz. The result is a sawtooth at 28409.1Hz -  27965.2Hz = 443.9Hz and an inaudible carrier at  28409.1Hz + 27965.2Hz = 56.4KHz.

## Resetting the timers

Writing to the STIMER register causes all of the timers to reload and sets the output flip-flops to 1. When highpass filters are disabled, this turns off the output of channels 1 and 2 and turns on the output of channels 3 and 4. This is useful to synchronize the sound channels.

Resetting timers with STIMER does not fire the timers. No IRQs are asserted, and no clock pulses are sent to the audio circuits.

STIMER has no effect on the phase offset of the 15KHz and 64KHz clocks, which can only be reset through initialization mode. Regardless of when STIMER is strobed, any timers that are using those clocks will still only decrement and underflow according to the timing of those clocks, and if such a timer hasn't decremented since the last time it was reset, there will be no effect on that timer. This can be exploited by using STIMER to reset

1.79MHz clocked timers without affecting the slowly clocked ones.

## STIMER preemption

If STIMER is written soon enough before when a timer would fire, the timer counter is reloaded before it can underflow and the related actions are preempted. This can include sending a clock pulse to the audio circuit, updating the serial port, or triggering an IRQ. Due to pipeline delays, this must be done at least a couple of cycles ahead of the timer underflow.

The last cycle that STIMER can be written to preempt the next underflow action is four cycles before the timer IRQ would be asserted in IRQST. For 8-bit timer 1 at 1.8MHz with AUDF1=0 started with an STIMER write at T+0, STIMER must be written again at T+4 to block the timer 1 IRQ being asserted in IRQST at T+8.

The extra two cycle period adjustment from two-tone mode does not affect this timing, because that is from an extra counter reload that occurs after the initial underflow.

## Reload timing

In general, the counter for a timer is only reloaded at the start of each period. Any changes to the timer's corresponding AUDF register only take effect at the next reload. For the first period after a write to STIMER, this reload occurs three cycles after a write to STIMER. This means that the last time the AUDF register can be updated to take effect for the first period is two cycles after the STIMER write. However, this is only possible with an accelerator as the 6502 can't write to both STIMER and AUDF that quickly.

Afterward, the next reload occurs a full period after the previous reload for an 8-bit timer. For instance, given an 8-bit timer at 1.8MHz with AUDF1=0, if the STIMER write is at cycle T+0, the first reload will be at T+3 and the second reload at T+7, making the deadlines to update T+2 and T+6. With AUDF1=5, the reloads are at T+3 and T+12 with deadlines T+2 and T+11. These reload times are also one cycle before the timer IRQ is signaled in IRQST, if enabled.

In linked (16-bit) mode, the timing for the low timer is changed due to the combined timer reload. The IRQ and STIMER preemption timing are similar to the 8-bit case, but the reload of the low timer is delayed by 3 cycles to match the high timer, and this also pushes out the deadline for writing AUDF1/3 by 3 cycles. For instance, with AUDF1=0 and AUDF2=0, the second reload for both timers is at T+9.

Two-tone mode also changes the reload timing deadlines because of the extra resync reload that occurs two cycles after the regular reload. Similarly to the linked case, the IRQ/preemption timing is the same, but the second reload overrides the first and pushes the reload times out by two cycles. This means that for timer 1 in 8bit two tone mode with AUDF1=0, the reload times are T+3 and T+9 instead of T+3 and T+7. This can be delayed by one more cycle in the double-resync case where the timer 1 and timer 2 periods are one cycle part, causing both timers to resync each other and extending both the reload timing and effective period by 3 cycles.

Figure 8: POKEY detailed timer timing

<!-- image -->

