## 5.4 Clock generation

There are three clocks that can by used to drive the timer counters. The first is the machine clock, which runs at 1.79MHz for NTSC and 1.77MHz for PAL. However, this clock runs much too fast for audio. Thus, the machine clock is divided by 28 and 114 within POKEY to provide additional 64KHz and 15KHz clocks with more useful range for audio. Because these are based on the machine clock and the machine clock varies slightly between NTSC and PAL machines, this means that the same divisor values in the AUDF1-4 registers produce slightly different frequencies between NTSC/PAL machines as well.

Table 9: POKEY clock frequencies

|         |         | Ideal Clock Rate   | Ideal Clock Rate   |
|---------|---------|--------------------|--------------------|
| Clock   | Divisor | NTSC               | PAL                |
| Machine | ÷ 1     | 1.78977MHz         | 1.77345MHz         |
| 64KHz   | ÷ 28    | 63.920KHz          | 63.337KHz          |
| 15KHz   | ÷ 114   | 15.700KHz          | 15.557KHz          |

Channels 1 and 3 can use the 1.8MHz machine clock independently, depending on bits 6 and 5 of AUDCTL [D208]. Channels 2 and 4, however, can only use the 64KHz or 15KHz clocks unless linked to channels 1 or 3 in 16-bit mode. Additionally, all channels must exclusively use either the 64KHz or 15KHz clocks together, as there is only one control bit to select between those two clocks, AUDCTL bit 0.

Both the 64KHz and 15KHz clocks are generated by polynomial counters internal to POKEY and have no guaranteed phase relation to other clocks in the system. In particular, the 15.7KHz clock uses the same divisor as ANTIC's horizontal scan counter and thus runs at the same rate, but there is no connection to synchronize the two. Instead, its phase is determined by when initialization mode is ended. Thus, the 15KHz clock may tick at an arbitrary offset in the scan line, but will remain locked to the same horizontal offset until initialization mode is reentered. This can be used in conjunction with timer IRQs for more flexible interrupt timing than DLIs.

While the 64KHz clock is used exclusively for audio, the 15KHz clock is also used for keyboard and paddle scanning.

