## 5.5 Noise generators

POKEY contains three noise generators, all composed of XNOR-based maximal-length linear feedback shift registers (LFSRs, or polynomial counters) that run at 1.8MHz. These are used both for generating audio noise as well as random numbers for the CPU.

All noise generators are shared between all four audio channels, and once initialized, are constantly running at a rate of 1 bit per machine cycle. On each cycle, a bit is shifted out the end for use and a new bit shifted in from the other end, computed as the XNOR of the end bit and one of the middle bits.

As maximal-length generators, each N-bit generator has a period of 2^N - 1, so the 4-bit generator repeats every 15 bits, and the 9-bit generator every 511 bits. This also means the generator patterns are slightly biased with one more 0 bit than 1 bit. When exiting initialization mode, all generators start zeroed.

## 4-bit and 5-bit noise generators

The 4- and 5-bit generators within POKEY are linear feedback shift registers with the polynomials `1+x^3+x^4` and `1+x^3+x^5`, respectively. They are only used for noise output and are not accessible to the CPU.

The 4-bit generator has the pattern: 000011101100101.

The 5-bit generator has the pattern: 0000011100100010101111011010011.

## 9/17-bit noise generator

POKEY also has a third shift register which is either 9 or 17 bits long, depending on bit 7 of AUDCTL. When in 9-bit (short) mode, the polynomial is `1+x^4+x^9`; when in 17-bit (long) mode, an additional eight bits are added to the shift register and the polynomial is `1+x^12+x^17`. Eight bits of the shift register are visible to the CPU via RANDOM [D20A]; this is most commonly used for random numbers, but it can also be used to test cycle counting hypotheses. RANDOM shifts right at the rate of one bit per machine cycle. Note that RANDOM reads bits inverted from the shift register itself and the bits seen by the audio circuits.

If the main LFSR is in 9-bit mode and samples are taken from RANDOM ($D20A) every scan line by STA WSYNC + LDA RANDOM, part of the sequence is as follows: 00 DF EE 16 B9.

## Audio channel noise delays

The outputs of the noise generators are delayed to each audio channel by one clock apart to prevent the channels from receiving the exact same noise. A given pattern bit arrives at channels 1, 2, 3, and then 4, in that order.

For the 9/17-bit generator, the audio channels receive noise from the right end of RANDOM. This means that all noise bits are visible to the CPU before they reach the audio circuitry.

Linked channels sample the noise generators from whichever channels are generating audio. Normally only the higher channel has nonzero volume, so its timing determines the noise produced. If the lower channel is enabled to produce sound, its noise output will be determined by that channel's timing, one cycle away from the higher channel.

## Initialization behavior

The polynomial counters must be reset on startup in case they power up in a lock-up state, of which there is always exactly one state: either all 1s or 0s, depending on the implementation of the counter. Initialization mode forces bits into the register until it is reset to the opposite of the lock-up state so that it is guaranteed to count normally when the initialization state ends. Initialization mode need not be asserted for a long period of time for the polynomial counters to work, as a single bit of the right polarity is enough to prevent lock-up.

Shortly after entering initialization mode, the audio circuits see a constant 0 from the 4-bit and 9/17-bit generators, while the 5-bit generator is a constant 1.

When exiting initialization mode, the polynomial counters begin counting immediately. For instance, if 9-bit mode is selected, executing STA SKCTL + LDA RANDOM back-to-back will give A=$1F, which is four bits after the all ones state.

When initialization mode is re-entered, 1s are shifted into RANDOM from the left side. Beginning with nine cycles after SKCTL is written to first enter init mode, RANDOM will always read $FF. Another nine cycles are needed for the rest of the shift register to clear; it will work fine if restarted earlier, but not all of the bits will have been reset.

