## 5.6 Serial port

The serial port is used to transfer data to and from the SIO bus. This allows for communication with disk drives, printers, cassette tape recorders, and other SIO-supporting peripherals. Two serial shift registers are used, one for input and one for output, and shared timers are used to clock the shift registers.

## Input shift register

Serial reception involves a 10-bit shift register and an 8-bit SERIN data register. When the serial input line is pulled low for the start bit, the input shift register begins shifting until it has received a total of ten bits: the start bit, eight data bits in order from LSB to MSB, and the stop bit. The eight data bits are copied into the SERIN register and the serial input ready IRQ (IRQEN/IRQST bit 5) is asserted if enabled to indicate that a byte is available. The shift register can then begin immediately receiving a new byte while the CPU reads the last byte from SERIN.

The SERIN register always contains the last input byte received, whether or not it had errors. Reading the SERIN register has no side effects; it does not acknowledge reception of a byte and it can be read multiple times before the next byte arrives. Only one byte can be queued in SERIN, as the next byte will be copied into it as soon as it completes even if no further bytes arrive and the shift register goes idle.

SKSTAT bit 1 indicates when the serial input shift register is active. It switches to 0 when the start bit is sampled and back to 1 when the stop bit is sampled. This means that when receiving back-to-back bytes, this bit is low 90% of the time (9 bit cells out of 10); it does not stay low continuously.

## Output shift register

Serial transmission involves another 10-bit shift register and 8-bit SEROUT data register. These are independent from the input shift register and both can act independently for full-duplex mode. Writing to the SEROUT register sets a bit indicating that a byte has been queued, after which it is copied into the shift register for serial transmission. After that happens, SEROUT can be loaded again with another byte. This allows one byte to queued so that bytes can be sent back-to-back even if small delays occur in loading SEROUT.

Only one byte can be loaded into SEROUT at a time. If a second byte is written before the first can be loaded into the shift register, the second byte replaces the first and only the second byte is sent.

The serial output ready IRQ (IRQEN/ST bit 4) is asserted when a load occurs from SEROUT to the ouput shift register and thus SEROUT is ready for another byte. This only occurs if a byte is pending in SEROUT, and thus the serial output must be primed by writing the first byte to SEROUT without waiting for the output ready interrupt. Continuous transmission is assured as long as SEROUT is reloaded before the previous byte finishes shifting out. The serial output ready IRQ is not asserted when shifting completes if no new byte is ready to load.

The serial output complete IRQ (IRQEN/ST bit 3) is asserted whenever the output shift register is idle. Unlike other POKEY IRQs, it is not latched - it will stay asserted even if it is disabled in IRQEN and will automatically deassert when shifting begins. This IRQ will stay inactive continuously while sending back-to-back bytes. One use for the output complete IRQ is to determine when shifting has completed so the serial hardware can be reconfigured. Another is to send with two stop bits instead of one stop bit, by using the output complete IRQ in place of the output ready IRQ.

## Warning

The output shift register only attempts to load once every bit cell time on the rising edge of the serial clock and thus there is a delay from the first write to SEROUT until the serial output ready/complete IRQs update and SEROUT is ready for a second byte. Attempting to write SEROUT twice without a wait for serial output ready in between can fail when the second byte replaces the first before it can be loaded into the shift register.

This also means that it is necessary to wait for serial output ready before checking serial output complete to end a transmission. Otherwise, if there is a delay in queuing bytes and the serial output shift register temporarily idles, it is possible for the serial output complete IRQ to fire after SEROUT has been reloaded, in the short time until the output shift register restarts on the next bit cell.

## Framing errors

SKSTAT bit 7 reports if a framing error occurs on the serial input port. A framing error occurs when shifting is started by detection of a 0 start bit, but the tenth bit that should be the stop bit is not a 1, indicating that the byte was not received correctly.

Framing errors do not affect the shift/load processes. The errant byte is still loaded into SERIN and a receive IRQ is still asserted, despite the error.

## Overrun errors

SKSTAT bit 5 indicates whether an overrun has occurred. 21 An overrun occurs when a serial byte is not read before the next byte is received; when this occurs, the new byte replaces the previous byte in SERIN and the previous byte is lost.

The overrun bit is set specifically when a new byte is received and the serial port logic attempts to assert the serial input interrupt when it is already active (IRQST bit 5 set to 0). This means that in order to acknowledge receipt of a byte from SERIN, the serial input interrupt (IRQST bit 5) must be reset. The interrupt should also be cleared before the start of a receive operation to clear any previously received stray data. Overruns are not detected if this interrupt is disabled.

Reading a data byte from SERIN by itself has no bearing on whether an overrun is detected, only the interrupt status.

The overrun bit in SKSTAT is sticky. Once an overrun occurs, it will remain set until the next write to SKRES, even if subsequent bytes are received without an overrun.

## Warning

The design of the serial port makes it impossible to completely reliably detect overrun errors since the serial input ready IRQ must be temporarily disabled to acknowledge it, during which time an overrun can be missed, and because there is necessarily a delay between the IRQ being acknowledged and the byte being read from SERIN.

There is no overrun detection for output. Writing SEROUT again when a byte is already pending simply replaces the previously queued byte with the new byte. Only one byte can be queued behind the one that is actively being shifted out.

[21] Credit to HiassofT for noting that the SKSTAT reference on [ATA82] III.18 has D5 and D6 swapped.

## Polled operation

It is possible to drive the serial port in polled mode by enabling serial interrupts on POKEY, disabling interrupts on the CPU, and then polling IRQST. This can be useful if the data rate is too high to use interrupts. The interrupt must both be enabled and masked since the interrupt status bit is required to detect the reception of a new data byte.

## Direct input

Bit 4 of SKSTAT directly reads the raw state of the serial input line. This bypasses all of the shifting and clocking logic and ignores all serial input settings, working even if all clocks are stopped. This is used by the kernel to measure baud rate prior to reading a block from cassette tape, since the serial input shift register cannot be used until the baud rate has been set.

## Clock selection

Bits 4-6 of SKCTL control the clocks used during serial port operation. These three bits affect a number of switches and gates and interact in complex manners. For instance, bit 4 generally enables asynchronous receive using timer 4, but it also sometimes changes the output clock as well. Each setting specifies a different combination of signals to use for both the input and output clocks, as well as whether to configure the bidirectional clock line as an input or an output. Here are all of the modes: 22

Table 10: Serial port timing modes

|   Setting | Input clock         | Output clock      | Bidirectional clock / SIO clock in signal   |
|-----------|---------------------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------|
|       000 | External clock      | External clock    | Input                                       |
|       001 | Channel 3+4 (async) | External clock    | Input                                       |
|       010 | Channel 4           | Channel 4         | Output channel 4                            |
|       011 | Channel 3+4 (async) | Channel 4 (async) | Input                                       |
|       100 | External clock      | Channel 4         | Input                                       |
|       101 | Channel 3+4 (async) | Channel 4 (async) | Input                                       |
|       110 | Channel 4 23        | Channel 2         | Output channel 4                            |
|       111 | Channel 3+4 (async) | Channel 2         | Input                                       |

The modes for standard half-duplex SIO operation are 001 for reception and 010 for transmission. The output clock and bidirectional clock signals are also connected to the SIO clock out and SIO clock in pins, respectively. The clock signals are not normally used; for instance, the 810 disk drive ignores the clock lines and uses timing loops for both transmission and reception.

Serial port clocks are produced by divide-by-two flip flops driven off of the counter outputs. They are not affected by any of the audio control bits in the AUDC1-4 registers. However, the clock select and linking bits in AUDCTL bit 0 and bits 3-6 - do affect serial port operation since they affect the countdown timers themselves.

When using timer channels to clock the serial port, the timer frequency should be set to twice the baud rate. 24

[22] [ATA82] II.27 has the official mode chart; see also unnumbered page with serial/audio diagram for exact switch and gate layout.

[23] [ATA82] II.27 and [AHS03] p.21 appear to have the same error of showing channel 2 as the input clock for the 110 setting. This is not possible, as only channel 4 or the bidirectional clock line can be routed to the serial input shift register. The description text correctly indicates channel 4.

[24] [ATA82] II.25. The output clock toggles level each time the timer expires, so the frequency of the clock is half the frequency of the timer.

Channels 3+4 should also be linked together and driven by the 1.79MHz clock for highest precision. For cassette operation at 600 baud, the divisor setting is $05CC; for disk operation at 19200 baud, it is $0028. Remember that there is a six cycle delay in reloading a 16-bit, 1.79MHz timer. Due to imprecision in the timer divisor at high frequencies, the actual transmission rate for the SIO bus is 19040 baud.

RIGOL

Horizontal

Period

Freq

Rise Time

Fall Time

+wvidth

-Width

1

=5.00 V

RIGOL

Horizontal

Period

Freq

Rise Time

Fall Time

+Width

-Width

=5.00 V

R1

B1

R1

WAM

TX[HEX]

Rx[HEX]

2

STOP

TX[HEX]

RX[HEX)

B

2

H

H

1

2.50 V

CH1

2.64 V

CH2

1.44 V

Figure 9: SIO send/receive clocking signals

<!-- image -->

Upper picture: SIO data out (cyan) with SIO clock out (yellow) while transmitting $4F at 19200 baud with SKCTL=$23.

Lower picture: SIO data in (cyan) with SIO clock out (yellow) while receiving $43 at 19200 baud with SKCTL=$33 (asynchronous).

50.0us

1.00MSa/s

6.00k pts

287.000000US

The fastest that the serial port can run using internal clocking is 128 kilobaud, since the only way that the 1.79MHz clock can be connected to the serial port is through linked timers, which divides the clock by 7 to 256KHz, which is then divided by two in the serial port logic to 128 kilobits/sec.

## Serial port reset

Setting bits 4-6 of SKCTL to %000, thus selecting an external clock for both input and output, also resets the serial input and output clock flip-flops to a known state. The serial output updates on the next output clock cycle, whereas the serial input updates after the next two input clock cycles.

This does not reset the serial input and output state machines, however. Initialization mode is required to do this, by setting bits 0-1 of SKCTL to 0. This interrupts any bytes currently being shifted in the input or output shift registers and flushes any byte that was queued for output in the SEROUT register. Finally, clearing bit 3 is needed to reset the output state of the toggle flip-flop used by two-tone mode. Thus, the serial port is fully reset by writing $00 to SKCTL.

One aspect of the serial point that is not reset by either means, however, is the bit currently being output on the SIO DATA OUT signal of the SIO bus. While initialization mode does reset the serial output state machine and stop the serial output shift register, it does not actually clear the shift register, leaving it outputting the last bit shifted out. Thus, interrupting a send can result in the SIO DATA OUT line being stuck in the low state, which can cause devices on the SIO bus to eternally attempt to shift in data bytes. This is not ordinarily a problem, as the command line is deasserted so that devices won't attempt to read in command frames, but it can be an issue if a device is listening for non-command data or when attempting to select timer 1 in two-tone mode.

## Timer usage during serial port operation

The serial port and audio circuitry both share the countdown timers and thus timers used for controlling the serial port are not available for audio generation. Usually channels 3 and 4 are used for clock generation; when using two-tone mode for recording to cassette, channels 1 and 2 are also occupied for FSK output.

Note that while the serial port uses the output of the counters, the audio circuitry is still active. This means that the occupied channels should normally be silenced by setting their volume to zero and the corresponding interrupt enables in IRQEN should also be disabled. However, the audio channels can be enabled for effect. The SIO library in the kernel ROM normally enables audio from channel 4 during transfers, producing the characteristic beep-beep-beep of Atari disk loads.

## Asynchronous receive mode

Setting bit 4 of SKCTL [$D20F] enables asynchronous receive mode. In this mode, timers 3 and 4 are held in reset state while POKEY is waiting for a start bit, allowing the timers to run only once a start bit is detected. This aligns timers 3+4 to the leading edge of the byte that the serial port input logic samples roughly in the center of each bit. Without this, the serial port input is not synchronized with the device on the other end and can sample between bits, producing errors. In most cases, and particularly with disk drives, serial input is not reliable without asynchronous mode.

Asynchronous receive mode also has the side effect of producing a characteristic audio tone when the sound output is enabled on timers 3 or 4. This occurs because the audio circuit receives an odd number of pulses for each byte (19), which in pure tone mode causes the audio channel to toggle once per byte. At 19200 baud, this produces approximately a 960Hz tone during the read of each disk sector. The exact pitch produced varies depending on the delay introduced by the device between bytes. This tone does not occur during transmission to the device as that is done in synchronous mode, where the timer(s) used for the output clock run continuously.

Since asynchronous mode holds timers 3 and 4 in reset while waiting for a start bit, those timers are stopped entirely when no data is being received. This means that leaving async mode enabled effectively disables

channels 3+4 for all audio except volume-only mode. Therefore, bit 4 of SKCTL should be cleared before attempting to use those channels for audio. 25

## Shift timing

As stated earlier, the serial port logic shifts bits in or out at half the rate of the controlling timer, with the input and output shift registers use alternating phases of the clock if they share the same timer. When asynchronous receive mode is enabled, it presets the clock at the beginning of the start bit so that the input shift register shifts in the start bit one period (half bit) later, sampling the middle of the start bit. Setting SKCTL bits 4-6 to %000 resets the clocks to the opposite phase.

The serial port shift registers are also only loaded or unloaded on this clock, which means that the interrupt bit latches are only activated on clock edges. This leads to unintuitive behavior when SEROUT is loaded for the first byte of an output stream, as the serial output shift register is only loaded at the next clock edge.

First, SEROUT cannot be written twice back-to-back at the start because of the delay. It is necessary to wait for the serial output ready IRQ (bit 4), which indicates when the contents of SEROUT have been moved to the output shift register. This can take up to an entire bit cell time. If SEROUT is written again before this happens, the second byte overwrites the first and only the second byte is transmitted instead.

Second, if the output shift register is initially idle, the serial output complete IRQ (bit 3) will not deassert until the load occurs, as it only does so after the shift register loads from SEROUT and begins shifting. This means that the complete IRQ should not be enabled or polled until the output register is known to be shifting, or else a transmit routine may fail to wait for the last byte to complete and truncate the transmission.

[25] [ATA82] II.26 states a slightly different rule, that the start bit resets channels 3+4.  This must be interpreted as waiting for the start bit and not the actual reception of the start bit in order to explain why those channels become silent when asynchronous mode is enabled even when no serial data is being received.

Figure 10: POKEY asynchronous serial receive timing

<!-- image -->

Figure 10 shows the timing relationships for asynchronous receive timing. Timers 3+4 are held frozen until POKEY detects the leading edge of the start bit, upon which the timers are started. Every timer 4 period is a halfbit, so sampling begins one period later and every two periods after that. 19 timer periods or 9½ bits later, the stop bit is sampled, SERIN is updated with the new data byte, the serial input ready IRQ is asserted, the overrun and framing error bits in SKSTAT are updated, and timers 3+4 are stopped. SKSTAT bit 1, which indicates whether the serial input shifter is busy, asserts halfway into the start bit and deasserts halfway into the stop bit.

Figure 11: POKEY synchronous serial receive/transmit timing

<!-- image -->

Figure 11 shows the timing for synchronous reception and transmission. Reception is the same as for asynchronous mode, except that the shift timing is determined by falling edges of the clock alone without the clock being restarted by the leading edge of the start bit. For transmission, each write to SEROUT immediately loads the SEROUT register, but the shift register is only loaded on the next rising edge of the clock. Once this happens, the serial complete IRQ is deasserted and the serial output ready IRQ is asserted, if enabled. SEROUT can then be reloaded with the next byte at any time before the first byte finishes sending. The serial output register is automatically reloaded with the second byte from SEROUT, and after it completes and no more bytes are queued, the serial output complete IRQ is reasserted. The serial output ready IRQ is not asserted a third time.

## Two-tone mode

Two-tone mode is used for frequency shift keying (FSK) encoding of serial output, replacing low and high signal levels with two different tones instead. This mode is enabled in POKEY by setting bit 3 of SKCTL. When enabled, the serial output port instead outputs square waves clocked by timers 1 and 2, where timer 1 is used for a 1 bit and timer 2 is used for a 0 bit. This is used most often for writing to cassette tape with the 64KHz clock, with AUDF1=$05 (5327Hz) for 1 bits and AUDF2=$07 (3995Hz) for 0 bits.

The switching between timers 1 and 2 is done in the serial logic and only affects the clock used there; it does not affect the audio circuitry, which will still react to timer 1 and 2 pulses without regard to the data bits being output by the serial port. Thus, the AUDC1 and AUDC2 registers do not affect the serial output and do not need to be set to pure tone mode; they are instead normally shut off at volume 0. The serial output port has its own divideby-two to generate the tones that is also independent from the audio circutry. It is not reset by STIMER, though it is reset to 0 when two-tone mode is disabled.

Two-tone mode has no effect on serial input. Unlike tape write operations, where POKEY must be configured to encode to FSK on serial output, POKEY has no logic for FSK decoding on input. This is done by the cassette tape deck instead, which outputs a conventional data stream for POKEY's serial input. Thus, two-tone mode is not needed for and not typically enabled for tape reads.

## Two-tone resync

Two-tone mode does still have some effect on audio output because it frequently resets timers 1 and 2 for continuous phase in the FSK output. Specifically, whenever the serial output toggles due to one of the timers, both timers are reset. The effect is that whenever the output data bit changes, the serial output seamlessly switches from one tone to the other without glitches in the output from partial pulse widths. However, resyncing the two timers this way can also alter the frequency or even mute the timers.

When a resync happens, both timers 1 and 2 have their counters reset to AUDF1 and AUDF2 values. As with STIMER, this does not send pulses to the audio circuits. This means that if the faster timer is driving the resync, it will continually interrupt the slower timer and prevent it from clocking its audio circuit. However, if the slower timer is driving the resync, then the faster timer will still be able to clock its audio circuit one or more times before being reset, although its frequency will be lowered to a multiple of the slower timer's frequency.

There is an asymmetry in the data bit switching logic which imposes a frequency requirement on the timers. Timer 1 pulses are only used by the serial output for a 1 bit, but timer 2 pulses are always used, causing a resync and toggling the output regardless of the current data bit. 26 This means that timer 2 must have a lower frequency for two-tone mode to function as intended. 27 Otherwise, timer 2 will preempt timer 1 before it can fire even when the current data bit is a 1, silencing the tone for 1 bits.

## Two-tone resync timing

The timer 1+2 reset in two-tone mode occurs two cycles after the timer that triggered the resync reloads. This doesn't matter in normal cassette write operation with the 64KHz clock, but it becomes important with timer 1 clocked at 1.79MHz.

The first effect of the delay is that if timer 1 at 1.79MHz drives the resync, it will have a period of two cycles longer than usual, due to being re-reloaded two cycles after the normal reload. Note that this only affects the second and subsequent periods after an STIMER reset, as there is no timer 1+2 resync at the start. Thus, a normal timer 1 configuration that would fire 8, 12, and 16 cycles after STIMER would instead fire after 8, 14, and 20 cycles instead. This change in period doesn't occur when using the 15KHz/64KHz clock for timer 1+2, as the

[26] The audio and serial port block diagram in [ATA82] is incorrect; it should show ((chan 1 AND serial) OR chan2) instead of a switch between chan 1 and chan 2 leading into the div-by-2 block in the two tones path.

[27] [ATA82] II.26

delay will be absorbed into the period to the next clock tick, which will fire 28 or 114 cycles later regardless.

The second effect is that the non-resyncing timer can fire up to one cycle later than the resyncing timer without being preempted. For instance, if timer 2 is set to a period of 28*3 = 84 cycles, timer 1 can be set to up to 85 cycles and still fire. If timer 1 is set to 86 cycles, then it will be preempted and not assert an IRQ or fire an audio tick.

The third effect is that it is possible for the two timers to mutually reset each other due to the delay. If both timers fire on the same cycle, then there is only one resync that occurs. However, if one timer has a period one cycle later than the other and both are enabled for resync (mark output), then each timer will trigger a resync of both timers two cycles after their normal reload, with two resyncs occurring back-to-back. When timer 2 fires one cycle after timer 1, this effectively adds three cycles to the next timer 1 period.

## Two-tone force break mode

In two-tone mode, the force break bit (SKCTL bit 7) forces the output to the tone for a 0 bit, instead of actually sending a constant 0 out the serial port. This is done by overriding the data bit input to the timer input switch so that pulses from timer 2, the timer for 0 data bits, is used for the output tone and timer resync regardless of the serial output data bit state.

This mode is sometimes useful when using two-tone mode for audio purposes instead of serial output, since it forces use of timer 2 regardless of the state of the serial output shift register.

