## 5.7 Interrupts

POKEY can issue interrupts to notify the CPU of events such as timer expiration and changes in serial port state. All interrupts from POKEY are IRQs.

## Interrupt enable/status

The IRQEN register selectively enables or disables interrupts; a 1 bit enables an interrupt. IRQST uses active-low polarity: a 0 bit indicates a pending interrupt, while a 1 bit indicates no interrupt pending. When an interrupt is enabled and becomes active, the corresponding bit in IRQST is cleared to 0 and the IRQ line to the 6502 CPU is asserted. POKEY will keep the IRQ line asserted until all pending interrupts are cleared by resetting the corresponding IRQEN bit; this ensures that the CPU will continue to execute its IRQ routine until all interrupts are serviced, even if an NMI intervenes temporarily.

Note that the serial transmission complete interrupt (bit 3) is special - it is not latched, so it is simply active whenever the serial output shift register is idle and automatically deasserts when a new byte begins to shift out. The corresponding IRQST bit will be cleared in that case even if bit 3 of IRQEN is cleared. This can be useful to assert an IRQ on the CPU on demand.

With the exception of bit 3, the status bit for a disabled interrupt is always locked to 1 (no interrupt). There is no interrupt queuing for a disabled interrupt - any interrupts that would have triggered while an interrupt is disabled are lost.

Disabling all interrupt sources in IRQEN does not block all IRQs; POKEY shares the IRQ control line with the PIA and the Parallel Bus Interface, which can also trigger IRQs on the CPU.

## Interrupt timing

There is a minimum 2-3 unhalted cycle delay from the time that an interrupt is signaled in the IRQST register to the first time that the 6502 will begin the seven cycle interrupt acknowledge sequence. This delay is extended if the 6502 is in the middle of executing an instruction when the three cycles have elapsed or if ANTIC halts the CPU for DMA.

## Machine-specific Behavior Warning

The IRQ delay can vary between systems or based on temperature. A 3 cycle delay appears to be more common, but some systems can consistently show 2 cycles. 28

## Enable/disable timing

A write to IRQEN that enables an interrupt must occur at least four cycles before the interrupt source activates, or else the interrupt will not be latched in IRQST and an IRQ will not occur. For instance, if a timer is configured such that the IRQ handler would trigger on cycle 16 of a scan line, the latest that the write to IRQEN can occur is cycle 12.

For disabling an interrupt, the write to IRQEN must occur at least two cycles in advance. In other words, for an IRQ on cycle 16, the write must occur on cycle 14 or earlier to block the interrupt in time. This means that there is a one-cycle window where an IRQ can still occur after its source has been shut off via IRQEN.

## Warning

The fact that a previously signaled IRQ can happen immediately after a write to IRQEN means that caution must be taken when attempting to shut off POKEY interrupts. Simply attempting to write $00 to IRQEN can fail if an IRQ occurs afterward and re-enables interrupts, leading to a rare crash. To be safe, mask interrupts with an SEI instruction before clearing IRQEN; this ensures that the 6502 cannot service the interrupt before noticing that the IRQ line has been negated.

It is also possible for the IRQ handler to be entered without an interrupt being signaled in IRQST by means of the serial output complete IRQ. This can happen because the serial output complete IRQ deasserts automatically once a new byte is loaded into the output shift register and there is a delay from when SEROUT is written to when this occurs.

## Initial interrupt state

Because POKEY has no reset pin, IRQEN state is indeterminate on start-up. IRQEN should be cleared before the 6502 I flag is cleared.

