## 5.8 Keyboard scan

The keyboard is automatically scanned by POKEY, which detects any pressed keys and notifies the CPU of new key presses.

## Key press detection

When a key is pressed, the key code is placed into bits 0-5 of the KBCODE [D209] register. The keyboard interrupt (IRQST/EN bit 6) is also activated if it is enabled. At the same time, SKSTAT bit 2 is set to indicate that a key is depressed and stays asserted as long as the key is held down, allowing software to implement key repetition.

Whenever a key code is latched into KBCODE, bits 6 and 7 are also set to indicate the state of the Shift and Control keys, respectively. These bits are updated at the same time as bit 0-5 and do not change if Shift or Control changes state without another key press. However, SKSTAT bit 3 is updated whenever a change in the Shift key is detected even if no other key is pressed.

[28] Credit goes to HiassofT for discovering this innovative method of measuring temperature with an Atari computer.

If the same key is pressed multiple times in a row, KBCODE does not change. Therefore, the only way to detect manually repeated key presses is through the keyboard IRQ or by polling SKSTAT. Key releases never change KBCODE or interrupt status and can only be detected by polling.

## Key codes

The key codes that appear in KBCODE are scan codes, which are different than ATASCII or INTERNAL codes for characters. Tables 11 and 12 lists the base key codes returned for each key, before the Shift and Ctrl bits are set.

Table 11: Key codes (scan matrix layout)

<!-- image -->

|     | +0/8   | +1/9   | +2/A   | +3/B   | +4/C   | +5/D   | +6/E     | +7/F   |
|-----|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|----------|--------|
| L   | J      | ; :    | F1     | F2     | K      | + \    | * ^      | $00    |
| O   |        | P      | U      | Ret    | I      | - _    | = &#124; | $08    |
| V   | Help   | C      | F3     | F4     | B      | X      | Z        | $10    |
| 4 $ |        | 3 #    | 6 &    | Esc    | 5%     | 2 "    | 1 !      | $18    |
| , [ | Space  | . ]    | N      |        | M      | / ?    | Invert   | $20    |
| R   |        | E      | Y      | Tab    | T      | W      | Q        | $28    |
| 9 ( |        | 0 )    | 7 '    | Bksp   | 8@     | <      | >        | $30    |
| F   | H      | D      |        | Caps   | G      | S      | A        | $38    |

Table 12: Key codes (130XE keyboard layout)

| Help [11]   | Start   | Select   | Option   | Reset   |
|-------------|---------|----------|----------|---------|

<!-- image -->

The Start, Select, Option, and Reset keys do not have key codes associated with them as they are detected differently; Shift and Control keys function as modifier keys.

Six key codes are not mapped to keys in the keyboard matrix and cannot be triggered in normal operation. The function keys F1-F4 are also absent on all models except the 1200XL. However, the absent key codes can be triggered on a stock keyboard if the keyboard debounce is disabled (SKCTL=$02). For instance, pressing O+V+Help quickly with debounce disabled can latch $09 into KBCODE. This is also theoretically possible with debounce enabled, but improbable due to the very tight timing requirements.

## Keyboard overruns

If a new key is pressed and detected while the keyboard IRQ is still active (IRQST bit 6), a keyboard overrun is signaled by clearing SKSTAT bit 6, and the new key code replaces the old one in KBCODE. Reading KBCODE has no effect on the IRQ or overrun state.

A keyboard overrun condition is cleared by writing to SKRES.

## Scan timing

The keyboard scan is triggered by the 15KHz clock. This means that keyboard IRQs occur relative to when the 15KHz clock is initialized. This typically means that the keyboard IRQ never hits the magic cycle on a scan line that can block NMIs, but just about every key can hit that cycle if POKEY is initialized at just the wrong offset. This happens if initialization mode is cleared at around cycle 32 on a scan line. The timing will vary somewhat due to variance in when the 6502 is able to acknowledge the interrupt.

## Scan algorithm

The keyboard scanning hardware consists of a 6-bit counter, a 6-bit latched compare register, and a state machine with four states. One key out of 64 total is checked per cycle at 15KHz, so a full scan takes 4ms. The state hardware functions as follows 29 :

- State 0 (key up) :
- If a key is down, latch the counter in the compare register and go to state 1.
- State 1 (debounce key down) :
- If the counter matches the compare register, and the current key is not down, go to state 0.
- If the counter matches the compare register, and the current key is down, assert the keyboard IRQ, clear bit 2 of SKSTAT, copy the counter value into KBCODE, and go to state 3.
- If the counter does not match the compare register, and the current key is down, go to state 0.
- State 3 (confirmed key down) :
- If the counter matches the compare register, and the current key is not down, go to state 2.
- State 2 (debounce key up) :
- If the counter matches the compare register, and the current key is not down, set bit 2 of SKSTAT and go to state 0.

This flow assumes that keyboard debounce (SKCTL bit 0) is enabled. If debounce is disabled, then comparisons against the compare register always pass. Thus, if a key press causes key code $01 to be detected and transition the state machine from state 0 to state 1, the state machine will immediately test if the next key ($02) is pressed instead of waiting 64 counts to test key $01 again.

SKSTAT bit 2, which indicates whether a key is held down, is updated based on the current state of the keyboard state machine. It is normally set when the state machine is in state 2 or 3. It is only updated after a key up or down has been debounced, and asserts at the same time that KBCODE is updated and the IRQ is triggered.

The design of the keyboard state machine limits the maximum normal (debounced) typing rate to approximately 60 characters per second, since key presses can only be registered once every four full keyboard scans (256 horizontal blanks).

[29] Flowchart versions of the keyboard state machine can also be found in [AHS03] and [AHS03a]. They do not, however, indicate the connection to SKSTAT.

## Control/Shift/Break scan

The Control, Shift, and Break keys are detected in parallel with other keys during the scan. Control and Shift are detected concurrently with scan codes $00 and $10, while Break is detected with $30. Control and Shift states are captured into internal latches that are later fed into SKSTAT bit 3 and KBCODE bits 6 and 7; Break is used to trigger the Break key IRQ. These keys are not affected by debounce, are not reflected in SKSTAT bit 2, and do not trigger keyboard overruns.

Both Shift keys are wired identically and cannot be distinguished in software.

The Break key is monitored only for key down transitions. When a Break key press is detected, the Break key IRQ (bit 7) is asserted if enabled. The IRQ will not retrigger while the key is held down and the key press is lost if the IRQ is disabled when the key down occurs, as the IRQ will not retrigger when re-enabled even if Break is still down. There is no direct way to determine if it is still depressed or when it is released. 30

## Keyboard scan enable

Bit 1 of SKCTL enables keyboard scanning. If it is disabled, the state machine is forced to state 0 and the counter is held in reset state. This causes SKSTAT bit 2 to reset to 1. However, KBCODE and any previously signaled keyboard IRQs are unaffected, and SKSTAT bit 3 retains its current state regardless of subsequent movements of the Shift key.

The Break key cannot be detected while the keyboard scan is disabled.

## Keyboard debounce

Bit 0 of SKCTL controls the debounce function. When enabled, a key must be detected as pressed in two consecutive scan cycles before a key press is registered, and the key must be released for two consecutive scan cycles before the key is considered released. This is intended to filter out noise from mechanical switches, which produce noise output when pressed or released. Unfortunately, this function is poorly named and has several side effects besides debouncing.

When enabled, the keyboard will never register a key press when two or more keys are pressed simultaneously. This is because the keyboard scan logic does a second pass over the keyboard to verify a key press and rejects it if another key is depressed at the same time. However, once a key press has been registered, any other keys are ignored and the key will continue to be reported as depressed until it is released.

When disabled, the keyboard is basically non-functional, as the keyboard state machine checks consecutive keys rather than the same key in consecutive cycles. In this mode, a key press will only register if two consecutive keys are held down, and afterward will register it for only two additional scan lines before reporting a release, even if the key is still held down. This pattern will also repeat every time the keyboard is scanned, so holding down a pair of adjacent keys will cause the second key to be reported once every 64 scan lines (~240 times a second). These effects are typically undesirable and so debounce normally must be enabled for normal keyboard operation.

Turning debounce off while a key is recognized as held down will cause a key up transition, as the keyboard state machine will transition through key up as it scans unactivated keys and then fail to re-enter key down due to failing to find two consecutive keys down.

Note that the 5200 keyboard is the opposite: it requires debounce to be disabled to function. See chapter 13 for details.

Shift and Break key detection are not affected by the debounce function - they are reported via SKSTAT bit 3 and IRQST bit 7 in the same manner regardless.

[30] It is possible to detect the Break state indirectly by phantom keys if specific other keys are depressed at the same time and debounce is disabled, but this is a corner case useless in practice.

Figure 12: Phantom key formation

<!-- image -->

The green line indicates the signal connection formed by three keys pressed at corners of a square in the keyboard matrix. This connects a row signal line to a column signal line as if the key at the dotted red circle location were pressed, at the fourth corner of the square.

## Key conflicts

While the POKEY hardware views the keyboard as a linear set of 64 keys, it is actually physically arranged as a 2D matrix where the high three bits of the key scan code control the output lines and low three bits control the input lines, and a key is detected when it connects an output line to an input line. Because there are no diodes on the keys, pressing three or more keys on a rectangle in the matrix can result in an additional phantom key appearing at the missing fourth corner of the rectangle. For instance, pressing L, J, and V will also result in the Help key being detected.

Ordinarily, this isn't a problem because the debounce logic prevents any keys from being registered when more than one non-modifier key is down, so adding a fourth key on top of three already pressed makes no difference. If debounce is disabled, however, the phantom keys can be detected when new pairs of keys with adjacent scan codes are activated. With L+J+V, for example, the L+J pair will result in KBCODE=$01, followed by V + phantom Help setting KBCODE=$11.

Where this particularly causes a problem is when two or more of the Control, Shift, or Break keys are pressed in conjunction with another key. These keys share a control line (KR2) and also share row lines with the regular keyboard, with Control sharing with $00-07, Shift with $10-17, and Break with $30-37. This effectively extends the 8x8 matrix to 8x9 and allows these keys to also participate in creating phantom keys. Pressing one of these keys at the same time as a regular key is OK because two keys are not enough to cause a problem, but pressing two of them in addition to a regular key will cause a phantom key to appear on the regular key matrix. The most noticeable impact of this is that none of the Control+Shift+key combinations for scan codes $C0-C7 or $D0-D7 can be detected, due to the keyboard scan seeing two keys down in the regular matrix. Also, Control+V+L will simulate Shift, and Control+L+9 will simulate Break.

Note that this problem is caused by the keyboard matrix hooked up to POKEY. On the 5200, the upper trigger is fully independent from the keypad and cannot contribute to phantom keys.

## Auto-repeat

There is no auto-repeat hardware in POKEY. Keyboard auto-repeat must be implemented in software.

