## 4.1 Basic operation

## Addressing

ANTIC occupies the $D4xx block of address space. Only the low four bits are decoded, so any address of the form $D4XY will address mirror X of register Y. The canonical registers are at $D400-D40F.

Unassigned addresses within the ANTIC address range read as $FF. This is true even on hardware models that have a floating data bus for unassigned addresses, as ANTIC actually drives $FF onto the bus for addresses in its range that don't have registers assigned.

## Reset behavior

On power-on or reset, ANTIC automatically clears the following items:

- NMIEN
- DMACTL
- Playfield DMA clock

The following items are not reset:

- Refresh row address counter
- Horizontal and vertical counters 11
- WSYNC
- HSCROL/VSCROL
- PMBASE
- CHBASE
- PENH/PENV
- CHACTL
- DLISTL/H
- NMIST
- Memory scan counter
- Pending RNMI

Typically a warm reset routine will clear all registers in order to reset ANTIC to a known state.

Note that on 400/800 hardware, ANTIC is only reset on power-on. On XL/XE hardware, the Reset button also resets ANTIC.

## Typical power-up values

Any registers that are not internally cleared by ANTIC on reset have undefined contents on power-up. However, the internal architecture biases some registers toward specific values:

[11] There is evidence in the chip circuitry of a power-on detector that is supposed to reset the horizontal and vertical counters only on power-up, but this does not seem to work in practice as the machine powers up with varying values of VCOUNT.

Table 5: Typical power-up values for ANTIC registers

| Register   | Typical power-up value   |
|------------|--------------------------|
| PENH       | $00                      |
| PENV       | $FF                      |
| NMIST      | $7F                      |

These values are most likely to appear when the system is powered up cold. If it has been powered down recently - within a few seconds - these registers may instead show some partial bits from when the system was last turned off.

