## 4.10 VCOUNT

The VCOUNT [D40B] register reflects bits 1-8 of the vertical scan counter. Bit 0 is not connected, so this only permits two-line resolution. For an NTSC machine, VCOUNT counts from $00 to $82; for PAL, it counts to $9B.

VCOUNT increments during horizontal blank so that the new value is seen starting on cycle 111 prior to that scan line. For instance, for the first scan line in the visible region (Y=8), VCOUNT can be read as $04 for three cycles (111-113) prior to the first missile fetch for the screen (0). Similarly, VCOUNT reads $7C for 13 cycles prior to the earliest point where the 6502 starts interrupt acknowledgment for the VBI (10).

If you are using VCOUNT to check for a scan line near the top of the screen, consider using a greater-equal check rather than an equality check, as otherwise the test can lock up if the VBI handler takes too long to execute. This is a common cause of lockup when programs meant for PAL are run under NTSC, where there is much less vertical blank time.

## End-of-frame anomaly

ANTIC requires one additional cycle to detect that the vertical counter has hit the end of frame value and to reset it to $00. This means that reading VCOUNT on exactly cycle 111 of the very last scan line will give $83 (NTSC) or $9C (PAL), which correspond to scan lines 262 and 312, respectively; starting with cycle 112, it reads $00. This is the only cycle in the frame where this highest value can be seen and is thus extremely rare, but it could be a surprise to a DLI handler using VCOUNT to index tables.
