## 4.11 Playfield DMA

## Fetch rates

ANTIC supports three different fetch rates for playfield DMA. The slowest rate is one fetch per eight cycles and is used for modes 8 and 9. The medium rate of one fetch per four cycles is used for modes 6-7 and A-C. The fastest rate of one fetch per two cycles is used for modes 2-5 and D-F.

During the first scan line of a character mode, ANTIC fetches both character names and character data. The data fetch occurs three cycles after the corresponding name fetch. For modes 2-5, this causes ANTIC to occupy the bus with playfield DMA continuously with name and data fetches for a large portion of the scan line.

## Line buffering

A 48 byte buffer within ANTIC is used to store graphic data for a single scan line. Its purpose is to buffer data for use on repeated scan lines, reducing DMA overhead. For bitmap modes, it allows ANTIC to only read graphics data for a mode line once, during the first scan line. For character modes, it holds the character name data which is then repeatedly used to fetch each scan line of character data from the character set.

Because only character names are buffered in character modes and not character data, the two text modes that have double-height characters - modes 5 and 7 - must still fetch character data on every scan line even though half of the fetches are redundant.

## Loading the line buffer

The line buffer is loaded during playfield DMA on the first scan line of a mode line during character name or bitmap graphics fetches. Character data fetches are not loaded into the line buffer. During normal operation, this loads 8, 16, or 32 bytes for a narrow playfield, 10, 20, or 40 bytes for a normal-width playfield, or 12, 24, or 48 bytes for a wide playfield.

If playfield DMA is disabled during portions of the first scan line, the DMA cycles are disabled but the loads still occur at the standard times, loading the current values of the bus as bitmap or character data. The internal address counter also continues to advance as usual, so if playfield DMA is re-enabled later in the scan line loads into the buffer will resume with the correct internal address for each horizontal location. However, if playfield DMA is disabled early enough so that the playfield never starts on the first scan line, no loads will occur and the line buffer will not be modified at all.

The line buffer is never cleared. Narrow or normal width playfield loads preserve the unused contents at the end of the line buffer. It is not changed by a blank mode line or a jump and the contents also persist across vertical blank. By carefully toggling playfield DMA and stretching mode lines through abuse of vertical scrolling, it is possible to fill the screen with playfield with reduced or even total absence of playfield DMA cycles.

## Line buffer addressing

The line buffer is addressed such that the first location is always accessed at the playfield start position. This means that if the same data is replayed with different start positions - either through varying HSCROL with horizontal scrolling or by varying playfield fetch in DMACTL - the displayed graphics will shift to follow the change in the left playfield border.

If the mode line is changed, causing a change in interpretation or in data rate, the buffered data is replayed just as if it were fetched from memory. For instance, if the line buffer is loaded with a normal mode E line and then

replayed in mode 8, the first 10 bytes of the mode E line will be reinterpreted as mode 8 data.

## Dynamic changes to playfield width

The playfield width bits in DMACTL[1:0], and the horizontal scroll position bits in HSCROL[3:1], determine the start and stop positions of the playfield on each scan line. Normally, ANTIC starts the playfield at the start position and stops the playfield at the stop position. Moving the timing of the start and stop positions dynamically can cause unusual playfield widths.

For the playfield start position, the deadlines for setting the playfield start position are cycles 24, 16, and 8 for narrow, normal, and wide fetch widths. Bits 1 and 0 of DMACTL must be set to the desired value by these cycle numbers to take effect. When horizontal scrolling is active, the deadline is delayed by one additional cycle for every increase by two in the HSCROL value. Various writes then have the following effects:

- Moving the start later (narrower fetch width or greater scroll value) takes effect as expected if done by the deadline, and is ignored for the current scan line if done too late.
- Moving the start earlier will still take effect if written by the deadline for the new width (earlier deadline). If the start is moved earlier by the deadline of the old position and after the deadline of the new position, the playfield will not start at all since the start has been moved back behind the current position.

The playfield stop position acts similarly, with corresponding deadlines of cycles 88, 96, and 104. Moving the stop later by the earlier deadline extends the playfield to the farther stop position. Moving the stop earlier behind the current position extends the playfield to the wide stop position, which is always active.

By changing the width and horizontal scroll values on the fly, it is possible to start and stop the playfield at mismatched positions. For instance, changing the playfield width from narrow to normal in the middle of the scan line with mode E will extend the playfield on the right side and cause additional bytes to be fetched. The resulting playfield is 144 color clocks wide and advances the memory scan counter by 36 bytes.

## Warning

It is easy to accidentally hit one of these corner cases when changing DMACTL from a DLI handler, since the window for cleanly changing the playfield width is very narrow. If you are using WSYNC to synchronize, you only have a few instructions afterward to write DMACTL before you are in the danger zone. Timing for changing DMA parameters is much tighter than those for display parameters, so change DMACTL before modifying color registers. Symptoms that you are hitting DMACTL too late include losing a line when trying to enable DMA, gaining an extra line when trying to disable it, or having subsequent playfield addressing screwed up unless LMS instructions are added to the display list.

## Disabling playfield DMA

Setting DMACTL bits 1-0 to %00 disables the playfield, shutting off both DMA cycles and the display. The playfield is always absent (background color) whenever playfield DMA is disabled. If it is disabled in the middle of an active playfield, it vanishes until re-enabled. This is true even in high-resolution modes: background is displayed, not PF2.

If playfield DMA is disabled before the playfield starts, the memory scan counter and line buffer are not updated. However, if disabled after playfield DMA starts, the memory scan counter continues to count and the line buffer is still loaded according to the current DMA pattern.

## Mid scan line changes to playfield DMA

Changing the playfield DMA mode via the low two bits of DMACTL in the middle of a scan line has a number of interesting effects. Much of this is related to the scan line buffer within ANTIC, which buffers some but not all of

the data between scan lines. Specific cases:

- In IR modes 2 and 3, the invert state is also not updated while DMA is disabled, resulting in the blanked scan line from the previous case displaying either PF2 or PF2L1 depending on the last seen invert state. This only occurs on the affected scan line; subsequent scan lines will once again show the correct invert state according to the buffered character names in the line buffer as long as DMA is re-enabled.
- For mode lines that span multiple scan lines, suspending playfield DMA for a portion of the first scan line results in portions of the line buffer not being updated. Previously written data in those portions are reused in display for subsequent scan lines. In character mode, this results in old character names being used.

