## 4.12 Abnormal playfield DMA

Under certain circumstances, ANTIC can lose track of playfield DMA such that it begins fetching playfield data with an abnormal pattern, producing a garbled playfield. This can also scramble the display list, which can in turn crash the CPU by issuing bogus DLIs. As these effects are very difficult to control, typically this condition is simply an unwanted artifact to avoid.

## DMA clock

There are two clocks within ANTIC that control playfield display, the DMA clock and the shift clock. Both are constructed as shift rings with taps to read cycling bits and extra gates to inject or clear bits in the cycling pattern. The first of these, the DMA clock, controls the timing of DMA cycles and the incrementing of the memory scan counter. It runs at machine cycle rate and is either two, four, or eight cycles long depending on the fetch rate required for the current playfield mode. Three taps off this clock produce the requests for character name, bitmap data, and character data at 0, +2, and +3 cycle offsets, respectively.

A single bit is injected into the DMA clock at playfield start, and that single bit position is cleared at playfield stop. The DMA clock is also unconditionally cleared whenever the current IR mode corresponds to a blank line or jump, or during vertical blank.

## Shift clock

The shift clock, on the other hand, controls the shifting of graphics data out of the graphic shift register. It is a four-bit ring and runs at color clock rate, twice as fast as the DMA clock. There are taps at all four bits and either one, two, or all four of them are enabled depending on the required shift rate for the graphic shift register, which shifts either one or two bits per interval.

ANTIC clears both the shift clock and the shift register during special DMA time (cycles 0-7). The shift clock starts running when bits are injected into it from the DMA clock by means of the bitmap or character data fetch, synchronizing it to the arrival of the first graphics byte from either the bus or line buffer RAM. It is not stopped at playfield stop, simply continuing to run to clear out the shift register.

Table 7 gives the rates for both clocks for each mode.

| IR Mode    | DMArate                    | Shift rate   | Shift mode   |
|------------|----------------------------|--------------|--------------|
| 2, 3, 4, 5 | Fast (every two cycles)    | Fast (1/cc)  | 2-bit        |
| 6, 7       | Medium (every four cycles) | Fast (1/cc)  | 1-bit        |
| 8          | Slow (every eight cycles)  | Slow (1/4cc) | 2-bit        |

Table 7: DMA and shift clock rates by mode

| IR Mode   | DMArate                    | Shift rate     | Shift mode   |
|-----------|----------------------------|----------------|--------------|
| 9         | Slow (every eight cycles)  | Medium (1/2cc) | 1-bit        |
| A         | Medium (every four cycles) | Medium (1/2cc) | 2-bit        |
| B, C      | Medium (every four cycles) | Fast (1/cc)    | 1-bit        |
| D, E, F   | Fast (every two cycles)    | Fast (1/cc)    | 2-bit        |

## Disrupting the DMA and shift clocks

As noted earlier, ANTIC stops the DMA clock by resetting a single bit in it at playfield stop time. Changing registers mid-scanline in a way that shifts the playfield stop position can cause ANTIC to clear the wrong bit and prevent it from stopping the DMA clock properly. When this happens, the DMA clock continues to run through horizontal blank and into the next scan line. This causes several undesirable results:

- Playfield DMA continues across horizontal blank and into the next scan line. This also advances the memory scan counter by additional steps, resulting in skipped playfield bytes. Note that playfield DMA cycles are still suppressed during cycles 105-111 and 0, so any extra cycles during that window are still virtual DMA cycles.
- DMA fetches can overlap. This can occur between playfield DMA itself - character name and character data fetch - or with special DMA such as display list and player graphics fetches. When this happens, the address used is the bitwise AND of all fetch addresses involved and the fetched data is used for all of the DMA requests. A refresh DMA cycle cannot overlap, however, as it is only triggered by the absence of other DMA requests.
- The clocks can run at faster than normal rate or with erratic timing. ANTIC can fetch continuously at one fetch/cycle even in graphics modes if the DMA clock is disrupted. When the shift clock is disrupted separately, pixels are shifted out to GTIA faster than normal for the mode line and 00 pixels are shifted out whenever the 8-bit shift register runs out of data bits.

## Disrupting the DMA clock with DMACTL

Changing the playfield width mid-scanline moves the DMA start and stop positions. This can result in the playfield being started or stopped more than once. All start and stop positions are separated by multiples of 8 cycles and align in the DMA clock. This means that starting or stopping the playfield DMA clock more than once in the same scan line has no adverse effect, though it can lead to a lopsided playfield.

Moving the playfield stop position back, or disabling it entirely by turning off the playfield, however, can result in ANTIC failing to stop the playfield DMA clock. This then results in playfield DMA continuing to run into horizontal blank and the next scan line.

## Disrupting the DMA clock with HSCROL

Another more subtle and common method of accidentally disrupting the playfield DMA clock is to change the horizontal scrolling offset (HSCROL). There are two reasons for this. The first is that some effects, such as perspective effects, require rewriting HSCROL on a per-scanline basis. The second reason is that enabling horizontal scrolling increases the fetch width, running the DMA clock later into horizontal blank past where WSYNC ends.

The pertinent effect of horizontal scrolling is that the playfield DMA pattern is delayed by one clock for every

increase in the HSCROL value by 2. This shifts the playfield DMA start and stop points, but notably doesn't affect the timing of the DMA clock once it has already started. This means that if the DMA stop position can be moved to a position that doesn't stop the DMA clock.

Whether this happens depends on the fetch rate, since slower DMA patterns are more likely to mismatch when shifted. At the slowest fetch rate (every 8c), this happens if HSCROL bits 1-3 mismatch from the start value. At medium rate (every 4c), only bits 1-2 matter, and at fast rate (every 2c), only bit 1 needs to matter. If the high bits mismatch but don't matter for this purpose, then the playfield will be an unusual width due to stopping early or late, but the DMA clock will still stop.

HSCROL bit 0 does not affect the DMA clock since it applies differently than bits 1-3 - rather than shifting the DMA pattern, it affects a separate single color clock delay in the playfield encoder. Thus, changing it cannot contribute to an abnormal DMA condition. Writing the same HSCROL value that is already in effect also doesn't cause problems.

## Safe DMACTL and HSCROL write timing

In order to affect the playfield DMA stop timing, a write to DMACTL or HSCROL must occur at least three cycles prior to where the next character fetch would occur in a character mode, or five cycles prior to where the next bitmap fetch would be in a bitmap mode. The first safe cycle is thus after that point. Expanded to all widths and scroll offsets:

| Starting playfield fetch width   | First safe cycle to write   |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Disabled                         | Any time                    |
| Narrow                           | 88 + [HSCROL÷2]             |
| Normal                           | 96 + [HSCROL÷2]             |
| Wide                             | 104 + [HSCROL÷2]            |

Delaying writes to at least the specified cycle ensures that the playfield DMA clock is already stopped by the time the new DMACTL or HSCROL value takes effect. The HSCROL value to use when determining the first safe cycle is the current value in effect, not the value that was in effect when the DMA clock started. If horizontal scrolling is disabled, the timing is the same as for HSCROL=0. For horizontally scrolled lines, use the fetch width, which is one tier wider than the displayed width. Blank and jump lines are the same as a disabled playfield.

The result is that a write to DMACTL or HSCROL may have to be delayed until cycle 111 to clear the worst case of a wide fetch width and HSCROL=15, three cycles before the missile DMA cycle. A common mistake is to attempt the write immediately after STA WSYNC, which is too early and can regularly fail; two NOPs are needed prior to STA DMACTL/HSCROL to make this safe.

Note that the playfield DMA clock still runs even for scan lines after the first of a mode line where no DMA cycles occur, and in horizontal blank after the WSYNC stop where they are suppressed. This is because the DMA clock is still used to advance the memory scan counter and the line buffer address. Therefore, the DMA clock can still be disrupted even in the absence of playfield DMA cycles.

## Disrupting the DMA clock with mode switching

Abnormal DMA patterns can also occur simply with specific orders of mode lines where the DMA clock slows down between the two mode lines. This happens because the DMA clock is always eight bits long even though the ring part is restricted to four or two bits for medium and fast shift rates, and thus it takes four or six clocks for any bits left in the clock to completely shift out. The DMA clock runs so late into horizontal blank when horizontal scrolling is active at normal or wide playfield width that these latent bits can be recaptured when the ring part of the clock is suddenly extended at the switch to the slowest speed. These extra bits then cause an abnormal DMA condition.

For this problem to occur, a playfield character name fetch must have been scheduled within cycles 109-111 for a character mode, or a graphics fetch within cycles 111-113 for a bitmap mode. The only conditions that can cause this are:

- Horizontally scrolled normal or wide width mode line at fast DMA fetch rate (modes 2-5 or D-F), with HSCROL &gt;= 10.
- Horizontally scrolled normal or wide width mode line at medium DMA fetch rate (modes 6-7 or A-C), with HSCROL &gt;= 14.
- Existing abnormal DMA condition including those fetch cycles.

These fetches do not have to be actual DMA cycles as the DMA clock still runs during subsequent mode lines to fetch from the internal line buffer. The bits captured during these 1-3 cycles then become extraneous fetches in the 4-bit or 8-bit playfield DMA pattern for the next scan line.

## Abnormal DMA patterns across scan lines

An abnormal DMA condition will persist across multiple scan lines as long as errant bits continue to cycle around the DMA clock and it is not stopped by a blank line or other clearing condition. This can result in ANTIC adding and then removing more bits from the DMA clock on the next line. However, because the scan line is 114 cycles long and not evenly divisible by the length of the DMA clock, the abnormal DMA pattern will change on each scan line when the DMA clock is operating in slow or medium speed modes where it is eight or four cycles long. This can result in the abnormal pattern resolving itself after a few scan lines as ANTIC 'sweeps' over the abnormal pattern at different offsets, removing one or more errant bits each time.

For example, changing HSCROL from $00 to $04 in the middle of a horizontally scrolled mode 8 line will shift the offset of playfield DMA cycles from %10000000 to %00001000 after the start bit has been injected into the clock, preventing the stop from occurring and causing the former pattern to stay in the DMA clock. However, because 114 mod 8 = 2, the errant pattern will have shifted by two clocks on the next scan line. ANTIC will then continue to set and reset a single bit in the pattern on each scan line at the current playfield DMA start and stop points:

| Start of line   | After playfield DMAstart   | After playfield DMAstop    |
|-----------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| %00000000       | %10000000                  | %10000000 (abnormal start) |
| %00000010       | %00001010                  | %00000010                  |
| %00001000       | %00001000                  | %00000000 (abnormal stop)  |

If the start/stop position for a line overlaps one of the bits in the abnormal DMA pattern, that bit will be removed at the DMA stop position. The result is that ANTIC can 'clean' abnormal DMA bits out of the DMA clock over subsequent scan lines. The combined effects of this pattern rotation per line and cleaning partly contributes to unusual graphics often appearing over several lines before the abnormal DMA condition resolves itself.

This effect will only resolve the abnormal DMA condition if the current DMA offset is on the same even/odd polarity as the abnormal bits, due to the +2 step per line. For instance, changing HSCROL to $02 instead in the above example ensures that the new DMA stop position will not clear the abnormal bits - instead, the DMA pattern will cycle %01000010, %01001000, %01100000, and %11000000 every four lines.

## Abnormal shift patterns

The shift clock is reset at the beginning of each scan line and initialized based on the pattern of DMA cycles produced by the DMA clock, which means that the shift clock can only run abnormally if the DMA clock is abnormal. However, the shift clock runs double speed at color clock rate and is only four bits long, which means only two bits can be affected by the even and odd fetches from the DMA clock. Furthermore, mode 8 is the only

mode in which the shift clock can be disrupted because every other mode already requires the playfield shift register to shift at least once per machine cycle anyway.

In mode 8, the shift pattern is abnormal if the DMA pattern includes both even and odd cycles. When this happens, the shift clock then runs at double normal speed, producing pixels at two color clock resolution (80 across) instead of four color clock (40 across) resolution. If this causes the shift register to empty before it is reloaded again, the background is produced (pixel code %00). 19

In all modes, the additional DMA cycles will also result in extra loads into the shift register. The extra data is ORed into the contents of the shift register. In character modes, this happens prior to the effects triggered by character name bits 6 and 7, such as inversion/blinking in IR modes 2 and 3 and the color changes in IR modes 4-7. This means that the next time a character name is read, the new values of bits 6 or 7 will immediately take effect, even for bits that have yet to shift out of the playfield shift register.

## Abnormal line buffer addressing

Ordinarily, ANTIC never advances beyond the 48 th location in the line buffer. An abnormal DMA clock, however, can advance the line buffer address faster at up to double normal speed, causing the line buffer address to exceed that limit or even wrap. The internal address counter is a 6-bit maximal length polynomial counter and has a sequence of 63 addresses. The first 48 addresses correspond the internal RAM and there is no response to the last 15 addresses. This means that when the line buffer is loaded, the entire 48 byte RAM is loaded before 15 fetches are discarded, and then the RAM is reloaded again. Similarly, during display, the 48 byte buffer is displayed and then the last 15 locations result in $FF data.

The second anomaly that can occur is that ANTIC can skip addresses in the line buffer when reading from it on back-to-back cycles in a bitmap mode. Specifically, whenever there are back-to-back cycles, all but the last fetch of the sequence will use the data from one later position. As a result, the value that should have been fetched first will be dropped and the last value will be used twice. This happens even on the first line where DMA fetches occur, because the data is first written to and then read from the line buffer. Only the reads from the line buffer are affected; the writes occur to the expected addresses and the buffered data will be normal if replayed on a subsequent mode line with a normal DMA clock.

## Overlapping DMA

Abnormal DMA patterns can cause DMA cycles to overlap. In a character mode, character name and data fetches can occur at the same time when the DMA clock causes both even and odd fetches. When this occurs, the bitwise AND of the two addresses is used as the fetch address and the returned data is used for both fetches.

Because playfield DMA cycles are blocked at the start of horizontal blank, no abnormal playfield DMA cycles will occur in cycles 105-113. However, playfield DMA is re-enabled starting at cycle 0, and there abnormal playfield DMA cycles can conflict with special DMA cycles, including display list and player/missle graphics DMA. Disabling the playfield via DMACTL[1:0] does not prevent this conflict. As with playfield-playfield DMA conflicts, the bitwise AND of all addresses is used and the fetched data goes to all requests.

[19] The reason this can happen, despite the DMA clock also running at double rate, is that the extra bits in the DMA clock may not be evenly spaced. A second fetch can partially overlap the first in the shift register, leaving a gap.

## Warning

The potential for overlap with display list DMA is what makes the abnormal playfield DMA bug a serious one. If it just affected the playfield, then the only problem would be visual glitching. When abnormal playfield DMA overlaps display list DMA, however, it can send the display list execution off into the weeds. This can then cause wild display list interrupts to fire and the program to crash.

## Resetting the playfield clocks

Whenever an appropriate playfield stop position is reached, ANTIC clears bits from the DMA clock. If there are no other bits left flying around in the clock, the abnormal condition is ended. Entering vertical blank or executing blank mode display list instructions ($x0 or $x1) will also unconditionally clear the DMA clock and end any abnormal DMA pattern.

Switching to a mode line with a faster shift rate will shorten the recirculating portion of the DMA clock. Once this happens, any extraneous bits in the non-circulating portion will shift out and no longer contribute to abnormal DMA.

Since the shift clock is reset by ANTIC at the beginning of each scan line, clearing an abnormal condition in the DMA clock will automatically fix the shift clock.

