## 4.13 Player/missile DMA

ANTIC can fetch graphics data for players and missiles on behalf of GTIA. Bit 3 of DMACTL enables player DMA, and bit 2 of DMACTL enables missile DMA. Missile DMA is forced on if player DMA is enabled in order to preserve proper timing against GTIA.

## Vertical resolution

Bit 4 of DMACTL switches between two-line and one-line resolution. This simply changes the addressing that ANTIC uses to fetch player data. If one-line resolution is selected (bit 4 = 1), each player/missile occupies 256 bytes of memory and unique data is fetched per scan line. If two-line resolution is selected, each player/missile occupies 128 bytes of memory and each byte is fetched twice on adjacent scan lines.

## P/M graphics memory layout

The address of player/missile data is specified by PMBASE [$D407]. In two-line resolution mode, player/missile data must be aligned on a 1K boundary and the upper six bits of the address are specified by bits 2-7 of PMBASE. In one-line resolution mode, P/M data must be aligned on a 2K boundary and the upper five bits of the address are specified by bits 3-7 of PMBASE, with bit 2 being ignored. However, bit 2 of PMBASE is still stored and becomes active if resolution is switched back to two-line without writing to PMBASE again.

The P/M graphics memory is in turn split into 8 sections of 128 or 256 bytes each. The first three sections are unused. The fourth section, starting at offset $0180 or $0300 from PMBASE, contains the four missiles; bits 7-6 correspond to missile 3 and bits 0-1 correspond to missile 0. The last four sections starting at $0200 or $0400 contain the graphics for players 0-3. Within each section, bits 0-7 or bits 1-7 of the vertical scan counter are used as the offset for fetching graphics data.

## P/M DMA timing

When enabled in DMACTL, player and missile data is fetched on each scan line within the visible region (8-247). This means that in one-line resolution mode, the first and last 8 bytes of each section are always unused. Missile

data is fetched during cycle 0 while player data is fetched during cycles 2-5.

In two-line resolution mode, bit 0 of the vertical resolution counter is ignored and each byte is fetched twice and sent to GTIA on consecutive scan lines. This means that the P/M graphics can still change on each scan line if the data is modified in between. The only difference between one-line and two-line resolution is in addressing. 20

## P/M DMA enable timing

Player/missile DMA must be enabled or disabled in DMACTL at least two cycles in advance to take effect. In particular, disabling missile DMA only one cycle earlier at cycle 113 will not prevent missile DMA from immediately occurring on the following cycle 0.

