## 4.15 Cycle counting example

Let's assume that we want to schedule a series of palette color changes between lines of 40-column text (ANTIC mode 2). To do this, we use the following DLI routine:

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Cycle counting breakdown

Figure 7 shows the DMA and instruction timing for the DLI handler. First, after receiving the NMI request at cycle 8 and acknowledging it at cycle 10, the 6502 has to finish the previous instruction. The worst case of six clocks is shown here. Afterward, it takes seven clocks for the 6502 to push PC and P onto the stack and to fetch the NMI vector. At this point playfield DMA starts, which slows down the CPU; the first instruction doesn't execute until cycle 28. From there, it takes 11 CPU cycles to execute the OS NMI handler, which actually takes 36 machine cycles with DMA contention, meaning that the user DLI handler isn't entered until cycle 66.

Once in the DLI handler, it takes 8 CPU cycles (16 machine cycles) to save X and A and 6 CPU cycles (12 machine cycles) to preload two colors. That's as much that can be done while still in the visible region, so on cycle 94, an STA WSYNC is executed. The first cycle of the next instruction is executed before the CPU is halted until cycle 105, after which X and A are pushed into the PF0 and PF1 color registers at cycles 107 and 111, respectively. Finally, the epilogue begins at cycle 112, where it takes 10 CPU cycles (11 machine cycles) to restore A and X and another six cycles to exit the DLI handler.

There are a few aspects to note about this DLI handler. First, it doesn't write NMIRES; that is generally unnecessary for DLIs. Second, the horizontal blank region before the line to be modified is critical timing-wise. In this case there would have been enough CPU time to STA WSYNC first and then both load and store the color values in HBLANK, but that's not always the case, especially with P/M DMA enabled or when the background color is involved. Second, the DLI handler consumes an entire scan line worth of CPU time despite only changing two registers and not setting up a subsequent DLI handler. In practice, this means that any large region that requires many perscan-line register changes is better done with a kernel started by one DLI rather than with multiple smaller DLIs.

