## 4.16 Examples

## Zaxxon II

This game uses a display list interrupt (DLI) on a scan line that is highly contended, with a scrolled normal width playfield and P/M graphics active. As a result, the 6502 is unable to read NMIST until past the standard interrupt cycle on the next scan line, and the DLI bit must remain active for more than a full scan line for Zaxxon to work correctly.

## Race in Space

Unusually, the interrupt flag is set on the wait for VBL instruction at the end of the display list for the title screen. The game relies on the high number of interrupts that this generates; failing to generate an interrupt per scan line results in the title screen scrolling very slowly or never completing.

Race in Space also uses player collisions against a hi-res (mode F) playfield.

## Numen

A lot of tricks are used in this demo, but it almost immediately goes into the 'GTIA 9++' mode where VSCROL is alternated to generate mode F with four scan lines per row and one-quarter the DMA overhead.

## Bounty Bob Strikes Back!

This game loops on an alias of the VCOUNT register, $D47B, and jams on startup if address mirroring is not supported.

## Chicken

The display list for Chicken contains a vertical scrolling region that ends on a blank mode line. The vertical scroll interaction causes this mode line to be variably extended beyond its usual one-scan-line height.

## Tarzan of the Apes

The mid-screen DLI routine for the title screen of this game expects VCOUNT to roll over prior to P/M DMA at the start of the next scan line.

## Atomix Plus!

There is a buggy loop in this game for copying memory below the kernel ROM ($D800-FFFF) that enables ANTIC interrupts before re-enabling the kernel ROM. It relies on a DLI or VBI never interrupting the following sequence:

LDA #$40 STA NMIEN LDA #$01 STA PORTB

## Pacem in Terris

One of the DLI handlers for the title screen attempts to change playfield width from narrow to normal by writing to DMACTL, but misses the deadline doing so. The result is that the scan line is blank and the 'Quasimodo' bitmap is shifted one scan line lower than the display list would indicate.

## Atari OS C: handler

The cassette (C:) handler in the Atari OS has a bug where it can rarely compute bogus baud rates due to improper reading of VCOUNT. The OS tries to read both VCOUNT and a frame counter maintained by the VBI and assumes that scan line 248 or higher (VCOUNT ≥ 124) always occurs after the VBI, but this is not the case. ANTIC triggers the VBI about a dozen cycles after VCOUNT increments to 124, so it is possible for VCOUNT=124 to occur both before and after the VBI. The former causes an erroneous baud rate to be computed by the OS.

