## 4.2 Display timing

As the main display processor in the system, ANTIC is responsible for overall display timing. The ideal display timings produced by ANTIC are as follows (ignoring component variation):

Table 6: ANTIC display timing

| Parameter                             | NTSC                            | PAL                             |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Master clock                          | 14.31818MHz                     | 14.18757MHz                     |
| Machine clock                         | 1.789773MHz (14.31818MHz ÷ 8)   | 1.773447MHz (14.18757MHz ÷ 8)   |
| Horizontal scan rate (scan line rate) | 15.69975KHz (1.789772MHz ÷ 114) | 15.55655KHz (1.773447MHz ÷ 114) |
| Vertical scan rate (frame rate)       | 59.92271Hz (15.69975KHz ÷ 262)  | 49.86074Hz (15.55655KHz ÷ 312)  |

Importantly, the horizontal and vertical scan rates deviate from ideal NTSC and PAL broadcast timing. For NTSC, the machine clock runs at exactly half the color subcarrier rate (3.58MHz), but the scan line is 114 machine cycles instead of 113.75 cycles and the frame has 262 scan lines instead of 262.5. This prevents the color subcarrier from inverting phase on each scan line and produces a non-interlaced display with 15.700KHz / 59.92Hz timing instead of an interlaced one with 15.735KHz / 59.94Hz timing.

Similarly, the PAL ANTIC produces 312 scan lines instead of 312.5 with 114 machine cycles per line instead of 113.5, and also produces a non-interlaced display.

## Mixed PAL/NTSC systems

While standard systems have matched ANTIC and GTIA chips, it is possible to combine an NTSC ANTIC with a PAL GTIA or vice versa. This results in either a 50Hz NTSC display or a 60Hz PAL display. The NTSC-50 case is the more interesting of the two as the 50Hz frame rate avoids many compatibility issues with software written for PAL. In such a mixed system, the ANTIC type determines the frame timing and the GTIA type determines the value read from the PAL register.

Although ANTIC does not directly indicate its type via a readable register like GTIA does, an NTSC ANTIC can readily be distinguished from a PAL ANTIC by polling the VCOUNT register.

## Pixel aspect ratios

The display timings used by ANTIC also determine the aspect ratio of pixels on screen. These pixels are not square, and furthermore, differ between NTSC and PAL.

For NTSC, a dot clock of 12.2727MHz corresponds to square pixels. 12 However, this is for interlaced video (~480 visible scan lines), so the equivalent rate for non-interlaced video is half the rate, 6.1364MHz. The dot clock produced by NTSC ANTIC+GTIA at hires mode is faster at 7.159MHz, giving a noticeably narrow pixel at 0.857:1. Player/missile graphics and higher-resolution but non-hires playfields typically use 160 clock resolution, however, so their pixels will be doubly wide at 1.714:1.

For PAL, a dot clock of 14.75MHz is used for square pixels in interlaced video, giving 7.375MHz for noninterlaced video. The PAL ANTIC+GTIA in hires mode outputs pixels at 7.094MHz, giving a slightly wide hires pixel at 1.04:1. Although not square, this is close enough for many purposes.

Many other computers of the era used a similar technique of generating pixels with a dot clock derived from the color subcarrier frequency and have comparable pixel aspect ratios, particularly the Apple II and the Amiga.

