## 4.3 Playfield

The main display produced by ANTIC is known as the playfield.

## Playfield width

Three playfield widths are supported: narrow, normal, and wide. The normal playfield width is 160 color clocks wide (320 hires pixels), and is used by all OS graphics modes. Narrow playfields are 128 color clocks wide; these are useful when the extra width is not needed, as narrow playfields have less data to set and also allow the CPU to run slightly faster. Wide playfields are 192 color clocks wide and even cover the overscan regions on the sides.

All three playfield widths share the same center, so a normal playfield adds 16 color clocks on each side of the narrow playfield, and a wide playfield adds another 16 color clocks on each side. However, the wide playfield is so wide that it is truncated: 12 color clocks are hidden on the left side and two are cut off by horizontal blank on the right. As a result, only 178 color clocks out of 192 are visible. 13

DMACTL bits 0-1 control the width of the playfield, and can also disable the playfield entirely, causing the background color to be displayed.

## Playfield colors

The playfield is composed of up to four colors, PF0-PF3, overlaid on top of the background (BAK). ANTIC tells the GTIA when each playfield color is used, and five independent color registers in GTIA are used to produce the final playfield. Depending on the display mode, there are four different color configurations:

- Two colors . These bitmap modes display either BAK or PF0.
- Four colors . These bitmap modes display BAK or PF0-PF2.
- Five colors . These character modes display BAK or PF0-PF3.
- One color in two luminances . These are special high-resolution modes where pixels are so narrow

[12] [TIVideoDec] p.2-7.

[13] The displayable width for a wide playfield is given as 176 color clocks in some references. The discrepancy is because in a wide unscrolled IR mode 2-5/D-F playfield, the last two color clocks are garbage due to suppressed DMA cycles. They are part of the playfield, however, as they can cause player-playfield collisions.

that they are only a half color clock wide. In these modes, the entire playfield is a single hue as specified by PF2, but the graphics data is used to conditionally substitute in the luminance from PF1.

The fourth playfield color, PF3, is seldom used by the playfield. Therefore, the GTIA contains a bit to reuse this color as a fifth color for player/missile graphics instead.

## Playfield modes

ANTIC supports fourteen playfield display modes, selected by the display list. Each playfield covers the entire width of the screen for some vertical distance, controlled by the display list; it is possible to vertically stack different playfield modes on the same screen. Six of the display modes are character modes, while the other eight are mapped (bitmap) modes.

## Playfield data ordering

All playfield data, including bitmap data and character font data, is stored such that bit 7 represents the left-most pixel on screen and bit 0 is the right-most pixel. In multicolor modes where a pair or group of four bits is used to represent a pixel, the bits are ordered as for CPU integers. For instance, the color PF1 in the second pixel of a four-color bitmap or character map mode would be represented by the pattern xx10xxxx.

