## 4.4 Character modes

The playfield can be configured to display text through character modes, which use a layer of indirection to produce output. In these modes, two separate memory regions are used:

- Character names . These are fetched first, and indicate which characters to display within the mode line.
- Character set data . The character names are then used to index into the current row of the character set to fetch the actual data to display.

Character modes allow text displays to be produced with minimal data manipulation, since the CPU need only modify one byte per character rather than copy the data for each character.

Some character modes display characters as monochrome, whereas others display characters as multicolor. The multicolor modes are often used to quickly display graphical tiles rather than text.

## Mode list

These are the character modes supported by ANTIC:

|   Mode |   Scan lines |   Colors |   Bytes (normal width) |   Resolution | Color mode   | Pixel size   |
|--------|--------------|----------|------------------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
|      2 |            8 |      1.5 |                     40 |           40 | Hi-res       | 8x8          |
|      3 |           10 |      1.5 |                     40 |           40 | Hi-res       | 8x8          |
|      4 |            8 |      5   |                     40 |           40 | Lo-res       | 8x8          |
|      5 |           16 |      5   |                     40 |           40 | Lo-res       | 8x16         |
|      6 |            8 |      5   |                     20 |           20 | Lo-res       | 16x8         |
|      7 |           16 |      5   |                     20 |           20 | Lo-res       | 16x16        |

## Modes 2 and 3: High-resolution monochrome text

Mode 2 is the standard 40-column screen seen on startup. Each playfield byte selects an 8x8 character from an

array of 128 pointed to by CHBASE; bit 7 controls inversion or blinking, based on modes in CHACTL.

The character set requires 1K of memory and must be aligned to a 1K boundary. Each of the 128 characters is described by 8 contiguous bytes, where the first byte corresponds to the data for the first scan line. With each byte, each bit corresponds to a pixel on screen, where bit 7 is the left-most pixel. Because mode 2 is a hi-res mode, the entire playfield uses the PF2 color, and each bit indicates whether luminance comes from PF2 (0 bit), or PF1 (1 bit).

Although it is not exposed as a standard OS mode, it is possible to enable the GTIA modes with a mode 2 or 3 playfield, thus giving a 9 or 16 color tiled playfield.

Mode 3 is similar to mode 2, except that each mode line is 10 scan lines tall instead of 8. The extra two scan lines reuse the same data from the first two, but only one of the pairs displays valid data. Characters $00-5F display data for scan lines 0-7 and display $00 data for rows 8-9, while characters 60-7F display on rows 2-9 instead and display $00 data for scan lines 0-1. This permits one-quarter of the character set to have descenders. For descenders to display properly, the character data must be stored out of order since rows 2-7 are displayed above rows 0-1.

## Modes 4 and 5: Multicolor text

Mode 4 is another character mode that produces 40 characters across in normal width, but unlike modes 2 and 3, mode 4 is a lo-res mode that produces up to five colors. Instead of each character producing monochrome characters in an 8x8 block, each character is instead 4x8 with pixels twice as wide. Normally each pair of bits produces either the background color (00) or PF0-PF2 (01-11). If bit 7 is set, however, the 11 pair produces PF3 instead of PF2.

Mode 5 is the same as mode 4, except that scan lines are repeated once and each character is 16 scan lines tall instead of 8.

## Modes 6 and 7: Single color text in five colors

Mode 6 is the familiar single-color, double-wide signature character mode of the Atari. At normal width, it produces 20 8x8 characters per row, where each pixel is one color clock wide. The character set is half the size in mode 6, requiring only 512 bytes and 512 byte alignment. Only 64 characters are available in the mode because the upper two bits are used to select the foreground color used by 1 bits, with 00-11 producing PF0PF3. 0 bits in the character data always produce the background color.

Mode 7 is the same as mode 6, except that scan lines are doubled and each character is 16 scan lines tall.

## Character set storage

All character modes require image data for each character. For modes 2-5, the character set is stored as 128 characters within a 1K block, aligned to a 1K boundary; for modes 6 and 7, it contains 64 characters within a 512 byte block, aligned on a 512 byte boundary. The low three bits of the address specify the row so that each contiguous block of 8 bytes represents a character.

The top 6 or 7 bits of the CHBASE register specify the base address of the character set. It can be dynamically changed on the fly, but the change will not take effect until two cycles past when the register is changed. While bit 1 is not used in modes that use 1K of character data, it is still stored on write and that latent bit will become active should a 0.5K character data mode activate.

## Blinking and inversion

In the high-resolution modes (modes 2 and 3), bit 7 of the character name is used as an extra attribute bit to

indicate reverse video or blinking. For this to happen, bits 0 and 1 of CHACTL must be used. When bit 1 is set, character cells with name bit 7 set are displayed inverted. When bit 0 is set, those cells are blanked as if the character font data were all zero bits. This means that in order for text to blink, software must periodically toggle the state of bit 0. Setting both bits 0 and 1 results in inverted space characters.

If display DMA is temporarily disabled when character name fetch would occur, ANTIC reuses the character names stored in the line buffer, but the invert/blink state that normally comes from bit 7 is reused from the last character rather than the bit 7 value from the line buffer.

Bits 0 and 1 of CHACTL have no effect in modes 4-7.

## Vertical reflection

Setting bit 2 of CHACTL flips all characters upside-down, displaying row 7 of the character set first. Unlike the blink and inversion features, this affects all character modes.

Vertical reflection works exactly as if the row bytes in the character set were reversed in order. This means that it produces nonsensical results for characters with descenders in mode 3 (60-7F), as the reflection causes rows 67 to appear in the descender area.

