## 4.5 Mapped (bitmap) modes

The playfield can also display data from memory directly in bitmap modes, which simply map single bits or pairs of bits to color. This allows every pixel to be completely independent at the cost of often requiring much more memory, as much as 8K per frame buffer. ANTIC always displays bitmap data with the first byte of each row and the most significant bit of each byte corresponding to the leftmost pixel.

The supported modes are as follows:

| Mode   |   Scan lines |   Colors |   Bytes (normal width) |   Resolution | Color mode   | Pixel size   |
|--------|--------------|----------|------------------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| 8      |            8 |      4   |                     10 |           40 | Lo-res       | 8x8          |
| 9      |            4 |      2   |                     10 |           80 | Lo-res       | 4x4          |
| A      |            4 |      4   |                     20 |           80 | Lo-res       | 4x4          |
| B      |            2 |      2   |                     20 |          160 | Lo-res       | 2x2          |
| C      |            1 |      2   |                     20 |          160 | Lo-res       | 2x1          |
| D      |            2 |      4   |                     40 |          160 | Lo-res       | 2x2          |
| E      |            1 |      4   |                     40 |          160 | Lo-res       | 2x1          |
| F      |            1 |      1.5 |                     40 |          320 | Hi-res       | 1x1          |

## Mode 8: Four color bitmap at lowest resolution (4x8 pixels)

Mode 8 is the lowest resolution graphics mode, producing 40 pixels across with one of four colors. Bits 7 and 6 of a byte correspond to the left-most pixel; 00 selects the background color while 01-11 produces PF0-PF2. Each pixel is 4 color clocks wide and 8 scan lines tall.

## Modes 9 and A: Bitmap modes with 2x4 pixels

Mode 9 is double the horizontal and vertical resolution of mode 8, with each pixel being 2 color clocks wide and 4 scan lines tall. However, it is only a two-color mode, with each bit selecting the background (0) or PF0 (1). Bit 7 is the left-most pixel in each byte.

Mode A is the four-color version of mode 9. Each pixel selects the background (00) or PF0-PF2 (01-11).

## Modes B and D: Bitmap modes with 1x2 pixels

Mode B increases resolution further to 1 color clock and 2 scan lines per pixel, with two colors per pixel (background and PF0).

Mode D is the same as mode B, except that each pixel is two bits and selects from one of four colors.

## Modes C and E: Bitmap modes with 1x1 pixels

Mode C is the same as mode B, except that mode lines are only one scan line high. It is the highest resolution two color bitmap mode available.

Mode E is the same as mode C, except that each pixel is two bits and selects from one of four colors. It is the highest resolution four color bitmap mode available.

## Mode F: High resolution bitmap mode

Mode F produces 320 pixels across at normal width, with each bit corresponding to a pixel one-half color clock wide and one scan line tall. It is a high-resolution mode, meaning that the whole playfield uses the PF2 color and the luminance from either PF2 (0) or PF1 (1).

This mode is also the mode that serves as the basis for the three new modes added with the GTIA; the only difference in setup is that bits 6 and 7 of PRIOR on the GTIA are set to a value other than 00.

