## 4.6 Display list

The display list determines how and when ANTIC fetches playfield data for display through GTIA. It is composed of a series of one-byte or three-byte instructions, each of which controls the display of at least one scan line on screen, and is normally repeated for every frame.

## Instruction pointer

The DLISTL and DLISTH registers contain the instruction pointer used to fetch the display list. At the end of each mode line, ANTIC fetches a new instruction at the location pointed to by DLISTL/DLISTH into the instruction register (IR), and then increments the pointer. This continues until a jump instruction is reached, which then loads a new address into DLISTL/DLISTH. ANTIC does not store the start of the display list and has no registers to do so; the display list must either loop or be restarted by the CPU.

The display list can reside anywhere in the 64K address space, but it cannot cross a 1K boundary. This is because the DLISTL/DLISTH register is actually split into 6 bit and 10 bit portions, where the lower 10 bits increment and the upper 6 bits do not. 14 As a result, during normal execution the display list will wrap from the top of a 1K block to the bottom during fetching, e.g. $07FF to $0400. This will happen even in the middle of a three-byte LMS or jump instruction. Jump instructions are not limited and can cross 1K boundaries to any address.

DLISTL/DLISTH are live during display list execution and any write to either will immediately change the address used for the next display list fetch. Because of the possibility of display list interrupts, it is dangerous to do this in the middle of a display list, as changing only one of the address bytes may cause ANTIC to execute random memory as a display list and therefore issue spurious DLIs. A $C1 instruction is particularly dangerous as it will cause a DLI to activate every scan line until vertical blank and can easily cause a crash. Therefore, the display

[14] Hardware II.10

list pointer should normally only be updated when either display list DMA is disabled or during vertical blank.

## Instruction format

A display list instruction is described in a single byte as follows:

<!-- image -->

| DLI   | LMS                                      | VS                                               | HS                                               | Mode                                             |
|-------|------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| D7    | Display list interrupt                   | Display list interrupt                           | Display list interrupt                           | Display list interrupt                           |
|       | 0                                        | No interrupt                                     | No interrupt                                     | No interrupt                                     |
|       | 1                                        | Interrupt CPU at beginning of last scan line     | Interrupt CPU at beginning of last scan line     | Interrupt CPU at beginning of last scan line     |
| D6    | Load memory scan counter (LMS operation) | Load memory scan counter (LMS operation)         | Load memory scan counter (LMS operation)         | Load memory scan counter (LMS operation)         |
|       | 0                                        | Normal                                           | Normal                                           | Normal                                           |
|       | 1                                        | Load memory scan counter with new 16-bit address | Load memory scan counter with new 16-bit address | Load memory scan counter with new 16-bit address |
| D5    | Vertical scroll                          | Vertical scroll                                  | Vertical scroll                                  | Vertical scroll                                  |
|       | 0                                        | Disable vertical scrolling                       | Disable vertical scrolling                       | Disable vertical scrolling                       |
|       | 1                                        | Enable vertical scrolling                        | Enable vertical scrolling                        | Enable vertical scrolling                        |
| D4    | Horizontal scroll                        | Horizontal scroll                                | Horizontal scroll                                | Horizontal scroll                                |
|       | 0                                        | Disable horizontal scrolling                     | Disable horizontal scrolling                     | Disable horizontal scrolling                     |
|       | 1                                        | Enable horizontal scrolling                      | Enable horizontal scrolling                      | Enable horizontal scrolling                      |
| D0:D3 | Mode                                     | Mode                                             | Mode                                             | Mode                                             |
|       | 0000                                     | Blank                                            | Blank                                            | Blank                                            |
|       | 0001                                     | Jump                                             | Jump                                             | Jump                                             |
|       | other                                    | Non-blank mode line                              | Non-blank mode line                              | Non-blank mode line                              |

Instruction bytes are read into the Instruction Register (IR) within ANTIC.

## Playfield mode lines

Modes 2-F select a playfield mode line for display.

## Load Memory Scan (LMS) commands

Setting bit 6 on a non-blank mode line causes the playfield memory scan pointer to be reloaded with a new address from the two following bytes, LSB first. This can be done on any such mode line and as frequently or infrequently as required; no blank line is incurred and the display appears uninterrupted. Normally one LMS is required at the beginning of the display list to reset the playfield address to the beginning of the screen memory.

Screen modes that require more than 4K of memory require at least one other LMS command in the middle of the screen to hop the 4K boundary. LMS commands may also be used in order to store rows of the display in discontiguous memory or with address spacing other than the default for the current playfield width, which is useful for large scrolling playfields.

## Warning

An LMS alone is not enough to correctly display a playfield that requires more than 4K of data. If a scan line crosses a 4K boundary, it will wrap around to the beginning of the 4K block in the middle of the scan line. This cannot be fixed with LMS as that can only affect the beginning of the scan line. The OS avoids this problem while still maintaining contiguous addressing by adjusting the offset of the playfield buffer so that the 4K boundary occurs exactly between scan lines.

## Blank mode lines (IR mode 0)

A blank mode line is specified by an instruction byte whose lowest four bits are 0000. In this case, bits 4-6 specify a scan line count instead, where 000-111 specify 1-8 scan lines. As a result, a blank mode line is always considered to have the horizontal/vertical scroll and LMS bits cleared. However, it can trigger a DLI, and is also subject to height modification if at the end of a vertical scrolling region.

## Jump command (IR mode 1)

Instruction bytes with a mode of 0001 are jump commands and are always followed by two bytes indicating the new instruction pointer for the display list. This produces a three-byte instruction similar to a 6502 JMP instruction, where the new 16-bit address is specified as low-byte first. Because the jump instruction occupies a display list slot, a blank line is displayed during its execution.

Like blank line instructions, jump instructions are never interpreted as having scrolling enabled, regardless of the values of bits 4 and 5, which are ignored for jump instructions. However, if the jump instruction follows a vertically scrolled mode line, it can be extended due to ending a vertical scrolling region the same way that blank lines can. When this occurs, ANTIC repeatedly fetches a new display list address at the beginning of each subsequent scan line. This has the effect of following a chain of indirect 16-bit addresses and is typically undesirable.

DLIs can be triggered on jump commands.

## Jump and wait for Vertical Blank (IR mode 1 + bit 6)

A jump instruction with bit 6 set ($41) also suspends the display list until vertical blank. This is usually used to terminate the display list and restart it for the next frame. When using a display list that loops using such an instruction, it is not necessary to write DLISTL/DLISTH per frame as ANTIC will autonomously repeat the display list every frame.

The internal execution of a JVB instruction is the same as if display DMA were disabled immediately after a jump instruction. No instruction or address bytes are fetched again, and the jump instruction is replayed over and over. If the previous instruction had vertical scrolling enabled, then the JVB instruction will initially have its height modified appropriately, and then replay subsequently with one scan line high as usual. Similarly, if the DLI bit is set on the JVB instruction ($C1), ANTIC will fire a DLI each and every time it is replayed, up to once per scan line.

Like any other instruction, JVB requires a scan line to execute. This means that attempting to create a display list with 240 visible scan lines and ending with a JVB will fail, since the JVB makes the display list 241 scan lines tall. Unless DLISTL/DLISTH is rewritten in the VBI to manually restart the display list each frame, this will result in a flickering display where even frames display the intended 240 line display and odd frames are blank frames consisting solely of the JVB instruction.

The display list pointer is reset when the address bytes are fetched on the first scan line of the JVB instruction. Writes to DLISTL/DLISTH afterward will replace the address that was loaded with JVB, even if they occur before vertical blank.

Once display list DMA has been suspended with a JVB instruction, there is no way to restart it other than to wait for vertical blank.

## Valid display list range

The display list starts at scan line 8 and ends no later than scan line 248. The maximum height of a display list is thus always 240 scan lines. This is true even in PAL, which has 50 more total scan lines than NTSC.

If a display list is too long, ANTIC automatically suspends the display list at the beginning of vertical blank at scan line 248 and resumes it at the end of vertical blank on scan line 8 of the next frame. This means that if a display list were exactly 480 scan lines tall and looped with a jump ($01) instruction, it would alternate perfectly between two images. Typically this doesn't happen, though, because the vertical blank routine reloads DLISTL/DLISTH. Otherwise, however, ANTIC will happily keep fetching instructions, wrapping around within 1K of memory over and over.

The vertical scroll bit (bit 5) is still tracked across vertical blank. This means that if the vertical scroll bit is always on for all displayed mode lines, no vertical scrolling actually occurs, because none of the mode lines is either the start or end of a vertical scrolling region.

Any mode line which extends partially over the vertical blank is truncated. If this occurs when a DLI is enabled on that mode line, the DLI is skipped since the last scan line never occurs.

## Suspended display list DMA

DMACTL bit 5 controls display list DMA, but the display list itself is actually always enabled. When DMA is disabled, the display list instead repeats its previous instruction byte. Any Jump or Load Memory Scan (LMS) commands are disabled as the address fetch is also skipped, and the display list pointer does not increment. If the display list was stopped after a JVB instruction ($41), this produces blank lines and the display list is effectively stopped. However, any other instruction byte activates a mode line as usual, including multi-row blank lines, character and bitmap mode lines, and even activating DLIs as usual.

Turning off display list DMA has no effect for the rest of a frame after a jump and wait for vertical blank ($41) instruction executes, as no fetches occur anyway once JVB completes.

While bits 0-5 and bit 7 of the instruction register are preserved across vertical blank, bit 6 of the IR is cleared across vertical blank. This makes no difference except in the extremely rare case where display list DMA is enabled on cycles 0 or 1, late enough for the instruction byte fetch to be suppressed but early enough for the address fetches to occur.

## Display list DMA enable/disable timing

Display list instructions are fetched on cycle 1 of a scan line, between missiles and players. However, display list DMA must be enabled by cycle 113 of the previous line in order for it to take effect at the beginning of the next line. If DMA is enabled on cycle 0, it still doesn't occur on the immediately following cycle.

## Hi-res last scan line bug

Under normal circumstances, a display list should not be constructed such that scan line 247 is a hi-res scan line. This is not ordinarily possible with a normal display list, only with one that is too long or by repeating mode lines by disabling display list DMA. If scan line 247 is a hi-res line, then ANTIC will fail to properly activate vertical blank or vertical sync in the active playfield display region whenever bits 0-1 of DMACTL[3:2] are other than 00. This can result in severe display distortion if vertical sync on scan lines 251-253 (NTSC) or 275-278 (PAL) is disturbed. Another side effect is that GTIA will continue to process player/missile graphics and P/M collisions in the non-blanked regions.

