## 4.7 Scrolling

Normally, a playfield can only be scrolled by changing the memory scan pointer used to begin fetching data. This restricts scrolling to byte granularity, which is fairly large on-screen for most display modes. ANTIC has support for both fine horizontal and vertical scrolling, which allows playfields to be scrolled more finely than by LMS instructions.

## Enabling horizontal scrolling

Bit 4 of a display list instruction enables horizontal scrolling for that mode line. This enables the fetch of extra playfield data and then shifts the playfield by the value specified in the HSCROL register, specified as the number of color clocks to shift the playfield right from 0-15. For a scroll value of 0, the visible playfield image is aligned as if the wider playfield were simply windowed to the requested width.

The same number of color clocks is displayed as without scrolling, so there are no visible scroll artifacts on the sides with horizontally scrolled narrow or normal width playfields. A wide playfield will shift in background color on the left with increasing scroll values, and also show a few color clocks of garbage on the rightmost border.

## Effects on playfield DMA

Enabling horizontal scrolling increases the fetch width by one level, so a narrow playfield fetches the same data as a normal playfield, and a normal playfield fetches a wide playfield's worth of data. This increases the number of bytes per scan line accordingly, which must be taken into account when laying out playfield data. It also results in more playfield DMA cycles, impacting CPU speed and DLI timing. There is no change in fetch width for wide playfields.

Playfield DMA is delayed by one cycle for each increase by two in the HSCROL value. Even and odd scroll values have the same DMA timing and are differentiated by an optional single color cycle delay within ANTIC. With normal or wide playfields, the shift in DMA timing results in some DMA cycles being dropped near the end of the scan line. While ANTIC doesn't halt the CPU during these cycles, it does still fetch data from the bus into internal memory and increment the memory scan counter.

## Scrolling high-resolution modes

High resolution modes cannot be scrolled with single pixel accuracy. It is only possible to scroll by pairs of pixels at a time because HSCROL only has color clock precision.

## Scrolling GTIA modes

In GTIA modes, data from adjacent color clocks are paired together by GTIA to form 4-bit pixels. The pairing is determined relative to horizontal blank and is not affected by horizontal scrolling. This means that for proper scrolling of these modes HSCROL should be set to even values only. If odd values are used, ANTIC will delay the playfield data by a color clock unbeknownst to GTIA, resulting in the wrong pairs of bits being merged together into pixels.

## Changes to HSCROL between rows of a mode line

For mode lines that are more than one scan line tall, it is possible to change HSCROL between scan lines within that mode line. This makes it possible to shear the mode line. The internally buffered data is replayed relative to the start of each scan line, so it moves as expected.

## Changes to HSCROL in the middle of a scan line

The horizontal scroll value can also be changed in the middle of a scan line, but the effects are less intuitive. The LSB of HSCROL which controls the internal color clock delay can be changed at any time for immediate effect, shifting following displayed data by a color clock. Changes to bits 1-3, however, will not result in a visible change at the point of change since they change the starting and stopping cycles for playfield DMA. For instance, changing HSCROL from 0 to 4 would have no visible effect, but changing it from 0 to 5 would.

There are two artifacts that can occur at the end of the scan line, however, when changing bits 1-3. The first is the change in the playfield DMA end position can change the number of bytes that the memory scan counter is advanced, resulting in playfield data for the next scan line being displaced. For instance, changing HSCROL from 0 to 8 in the middle of a horizontally scrolled, narrow width mode 7 line will result in the memory scan counter being advanced by 21 bytes instead of 20. A more serious artifact occurs if the playfield DMA pattern for the new scroll value no longer aligns with the pattern that was established when DMA started; this happens if bit 1 is changed in modes 2-5/D-F, bits 1-2 in modes 6-7/A-C, or bits 1-3 in modes 8-9. Doing so changes the cycle at which ANTIC attempts to stop playfield DMA, and if it fails, playfield DMA continues through horizontal blank and into the next scan line.

## Artifacts with wide playfields

With some combinations of IR mode and horizontal scroll values, it is possible for garbage to appear on the right side of a wide playfield. This garbage appears very far right and off the visible areas of most televisions, although some can display it. The garbage data is not random: it corresponds to activity on the data bus during playfield fetches blocked due to occurring too late in the scan line (see DMA timing charts). This is usually limited to 1-2 color clocks and is more likely to happen in character modes due to character data being fetched one cycle later relative to display than bitmap data. The effect can extend farther left if HSCROL is changed in the middle of a mode line to shift display of data in ANTIC's internal buffer.

Figure 3: Effect of vertical scrolling on mode lines

<!-- image -->

Most of the time, the garbage is simply an unwanted artifact. However, because this data is sent to GTIA, it can be detected by player/missile collisions against the playfield and can be a source of unwanted collisions.

## Vertical scrolling

Vertical scrolling in ANTIC is controlled by bit 5 of a display list instruction. When bit 5 is set, the VSCROL [D405] register modifies the height of selected mode lines in the display list to allow portions of the display to be scrolled on a scan line basis. When the vertical scrolling bit changes from a 0 to a 1 on adjacent mode lines, the first line for which it is set is shortened by starting it at the scan line specified by VSCROL. Similarly, when it changes from a 1 to a 0, the first line for which that bit is reset is also shortened by ending it at that scan line. This means that a vertically scrolled region consisting of three mode 2 lines will have bit 5 set on the first two lines and occupy (8-VSCROL) + 8 + (VSCROL+1) = 17 scan lines instead of the usual 24.

VSCROL and the row counter are both 4-bit counters regardless of mode, and odd effects can be created by setting them to out of range values. For instance, a mode F scan line is only one scan line high and ordinarily vertical scrolling doesn't make sense. However, if VSCROL is set to 13 upon entering such a scan line, the row counter will count from 13 to 0, creating a mode F region where each pixel is four scan lines tall, but the DMA overhead is still only for one scan line. This is similarly possible when exiting the vertically scrolled region by setting VSCROL to 3 so that the row counter runs from 0 to 3. This creates the so-called 'GTIA 9++' mode where GTIA modes can be run with lower vertical resolution with much lower DMA overhead than if LMS lines were used to produce the same effect.

There are different deadlines for VSCROL changes depending on what specifically is affected. For determining the initial row counter when entering a vertical scrolling region, VSCROL must be written by cycle 0, and for

Figure 4: Abusing vertical scrolling in the 'GTIA 9++' mode

<!-- image -->

determining the final row for the end of a scrolled region, it must be written by cycle 108. The six clock window between these deadlines can be abused in order to halve the number of DLIs required to implement a turbo mode. This is done by writing VSCROL twice in quick succession, with the first value terminating the current mode line and the second value setting the height of the next. Finally, VSCROL must be written by cycle 5 to affect DLIs.

Vertical scrolling regions do not have to exclusively use the same mode, as the vertical scrolling functionality only affects the starting and ending mode lines via row count.

Blank mode lines ($x0) are always considered to have the vertical scroll bit cleared since the scroll bits are used for a blank line count instead. The blank line is still subject to height changes if it ends a vertically scrolled region, however. Jump instructions ($x1) can also have their height modified in the same way.

## Mode lines with unusual height

All mode lines can be extended beyond their normal height up to 16 scan lines through vertical scrolling.

IR mode 0 lines are always blank, no matter how high.

IR mode 1 lines are always blank, but when extended beyond one scan line, re-fetch DLISTL and DLISTH on each scan line.

For IR mode 2, rows 8-9 are blanked for characters $00-5F and $80-DF the same way that they are for IR mode 3. Rows 10-15 are the same as rows 2-7.

For IR mode 3, rows 10-15 are the same as rows 2-7.

For IR modes 4 and 6, rows 8-15 are the same as 0-7.

For all bitmap modes (IR modes 8-15), all rows are the same. Regardless of how high the bitmap mode line is or the starting row, the data fetch still always only occurs on the first scan line.

It is possible to extend mode lines beyond even 16 scan lines by changing VSCROL in the middle of the mode line. Since the delta counter (row counter) is only 4 bits wide, rows 0-15 are repeated until the mode line ends.

## Mode 8/9 horizontal scrolling bug

IR 8 and 9 mode lines can be corrupted if they follow a horizontally scrolled mode line at normal or wide width. This occurs when the prior line uses IR modes 2-5 or D-F with HSCROL &gt;= 10, or modes 6-7 or A-C with HSCROL &gt;= 14. When this happens, the memory scan counter is incorrect unless reset with an LMS instruction, pixels are shifted out at incorrect rates, and scan lines within the mode 8-9 line are not aligned properly. This bug can occur regardless of whether the mode 8/9 line is horizontally scrolled, although the artifacts are different.

The effects can also carry over into subsequent mode 8/9 lines:

- Non-scrolled IR mode 8/9 line:
- Following mode 2-5/D-F, HSCROL=A-B or E-F: Corruption carries over to subsequent scan lines.
- Following mode 2-5/D-F, HSCROL=C-D: Resolves itself within two scan lines.
- Following mode 6-7/A-C, HSCROL=E-F : Corruption carries over to subsequent scan lines.
- Scrolled mode 8/9 line:
- Following mode 2-5/D-F: Resolves itself within three scan lines.
- Following mode 6-7/A-C: Resolves itself within two scan lines.

The effect does not occur with narrow playfield width. The cause of this bug is the playfield DMA clock failing to stop properly; see Abnormal playfield DMA for details.

