## 4.8 Non-maskable interrupts

ANTIC can assert two types of non-maskable interrupts to synchronize the CPU to the display. Vertical blank interrupts (VBIs) occur at the end of the displayable region and are used to synchronize to frames. Display list interrupts (DLIs) occur in the middle of the displayable region and are used to effect mid-screen changes that are not possible through the display list alone.

## Enabling interrupts

Setting bits 6 and 7 of NMIEN enable DLIs and VBIs, respectively. Once an interrupt is enabled, ANTIC will then assert an NMI on the CPU at the beginning of scan line 248 for VBIs, or the last scan line of a DLI-enabled mode line. The NMI handler will then begin execution on the next instruction boundary at cycle 10 or later.

NMIEN must be written by cycle 7 to enable an interrupt and by cycle 8 in order to disable it.

## Triggering a DLI

To trigger a DLI, bit 7 should be set on a display list instruction. This causes ANTIC to fire an NMI at the start of the last scan line for that mode line. Typically the DLI interrupt handler will then issue an STA WSYNC in order to synchronize to the end of the scan line, enabling it to write to hardware registers just prior to the next mode line at a time where the user will not see artifacts from the changes.

You can set the DLI bit on any mode line, including a blank mode line. The strangest use is when the DLI bit is set on a wait for vertical blank instruction ($C1); this causes a DLI to be issued on every scan line until vertical blank begins at scan line 248. Obviously, the DLI must be very short to run reliably in this situation, but it is possible.

If vertical scrolling causes a mode line with a DLI to be shortened, the DLI will still fire at the end of the shortened mode line, and just prior to the next mode line. This can cause surprises if a DLI is attempted at the start or end of a vertically scrolled region, because this can cause the DLI to occur on the more strongly contended first scan line.

## Reading interrupt status

Since all NMIs from ANTIC route through a single vector on the CPU, the NMIST register is used to determine the interrupt source. Bit 7 indicates a DLI, bit 6 indicates a VBI, and bit 5 indicates that the system reset button was pressed (400/800 only). The status bits in NMIST are independent of the enable bits in NMIEN: interrupt status is reported even for disabled interrupts.

The reset (RNMI) bit stays latched until cleared by NMIRES, but the VBI and DLI bits are mutually exclusive: the DLI bit is cleared at scan line 248, and the VBI bit is cleared whenever a DLI occurs. This happens regardless of whether either interrupt is masked in NMIEN. This means that it is generally unnecessary to test the VBI bit or write to NMIRES past boot - the NMI routine can test bit 7 for a DLI, bit 5 for reset, and then assume a VBI otherwise. It also means that it is possible to use DLIs passively by polling for them instead of using an interrupt handler.

NMIST bits 6 and 7 are set starting on cycle 7 of a scan line where a VBI or DLI is active. Clearing those bits by writing NMIRES does not prevent the interrupt from firing, but can confuse an NMI dispatch routine.

## Interrupt dispatch timing

The earliest that the CPU can normally begin execution of the seven-cycle sequence to enter the NMI handler is cycle 10, with additional delays as needed to finish the current instruction. However, if an IRQ triggers starting at cycles 5-9, its interrupt sequence can be co-opted by the NMI, allowing the NMI to execute correspondingly earlier.

If an interrupt is enabled on exactly cycle 7 of a scan line, NMI timing is delayed by one cycle to cycle 11.

## DLI timing

Display list interrupts have extremely critical timing for two reasons: they have to change hardware registers within a very narrow window of time (usually horizontal blank), and they need to execute quickly to avoid conflicting with each other or stealing too much CPU from mainline and IRQ routines. As such, it is very useful to count exact cycles for DLI execution.

DLI execution proceeds as follows 15 :

- ANTIC pulls NMI at cycle 8 at the beginning of a scan line, right after display list and P/M DMA.
- The 6502 requires two cycles to acknowledge the NMI 16 .
- 0-6 cycles pass as the 6502 finishes the currently executing instruction.
- Interrupt entry takes 7 cycles.

Thus, if you are writing a custom NMI handler, the earliest that the handler will run is cycle 17. Note that DMA

[15] De Re Atari also has a good description of DLI timing and explains how to break a DLI routine into phases by timing requirements.

[16] [MOS76] 38

contention will slow down this sequence, and it's virtually guaranteed that at least refresh DMA will interfere starting with cycle 25.

If the OS handler is used, then the OS will execute a BIT NMIST / BPL not taken / JMP (VDSLST) sequence before executing your handler, resulting in an additional 11 cycles of delay. Including refresh DMA, your handler will execute starting on cycle 28-36.

At this point, the normal procedure is to save registers as needed, load up registers with needed values, STA WSYNC, and then write values to hardware registers as quickly as possible during horizontal blank. Afterward, the exit path will frequently spill into the middle of the next scan line, but that is not nearly as critical.

Note that these timings assume that the DLI is occurring on a blank mode line. Any non-blank line will require playfield DMA cycles that will significantly delay interrupt routine execution: a normal-width mode 0 line will shift the entry window for the OS case to cycles 36-44, and horizontal scrolling or wide playfields makes this worse. Extra care is required when using DLIs around vertical scrolling, because it can shorten a mode line to only the first scan line, causing a DLI to fire on a scan line where the active region is blocked by solid playfield DMA. The extreme case occurs if the next mode line is also a character mode line, which can result in so much DMA contention that two entire scan lines pass before the 6502 can even enter the DLI handler.

## Missed NMIs

If the 6502 responds to an IRQ starting at exactly cycle 4, any NMI that ANTIC would have triggered on cycle 8 will be lost. 17 This happens whenever the IRQ acknowledgment sequence occurs over cycles 4-10 and includes DLIs, VBIs, and on the 400/800, the SYSTEM RESET interrupt. NMIST is still updated as usual, however. The most visible artifact caused by this problem is glitching on screen if you attempt to use DLIs while an SIO transfer is in progress. However, it can happen with any IRQ source, including POKEY timers and the keyboard. It can also occur with an exactly timed BRK instruction. It cannot, however, occur with a regular instruction, not even one that takes seven cycles (INC abs,X).

## DLIs and writes to VSCROL

A vertically scrolled region ends when the row counter matches the value in VSCROL. Normally, this happens shortly before the display list fetch at the end of the scan line. However, when a DLI is requested on the ending mode line, ANTIC must determine the end of the mode line much earlier in a scan line. Specifically, this happens shortly before the DLI would occur. A write to VSCROL that affects whether a DLI occurs on a scan line must occur by cycle 5. Writes after that point will be too late to block or trigger the DLI, but will still affect the height of the mode line.

## System Reset NMI

ANTIC supports a third type of NMI, triggered by the System Reset button on 400/800 models. On these models, the System Reset button asserts the /RNMI input on ANTIC, and once this is held across the leading edge of VBLANK, the Reset NMI is triggered.

The Reset NMI is synchronized to the VBI, so it will always happen at the start of VBLANK and both the VBI and RNMI will trigger together. Both bits 5 and 6 of NMIST will also turn on, so the NMI handler must give the RNMI priority over VBI processing and trigger a warm start when bit 5 is set. All systems that use the RNMI also have a fixed OS and NMI vector, so ordinarily this is always handled by the OS before user code can see it.

As the Reset NMI cannot be masked, the OS cannot defend against it occurring before cold start initialization has completed. User manuals therefore politely ask the user to not hold System Reset on power-up to avoid premature warm start.

[17] Speculation on the AtariAge forums is that this is caused by a bug in ANTIC, which does not assert the NMI line long enough for the CPU to reliably acknowledge the interrupt.

On the XL/XE series, the Reset NMI is unused and not connected; the System Reset button asserts the reset line across the system instead. However, it is still possible for the RNMI status bit to be set in NMIST as it is not cleared on power-up or reset. Once it has been cleared, it will no longer become set again, even if the Reset button is pressed.

