## 4.9 WSYNC

A write to WSYNC [D40A] halts CPU execution until the end of a scan line, allowing the CPU to synchronize to the display. One more cycle elapses before the CPU is halted until cycle 105, when execution resumes around the start of horizontal blank. Because the CPU usually gets to execute the first cycle of the next instruction, this appears as if the instruction started on cycle 104. There are, however, three circumstances that can change this behavior:

- If the cycle immediately after writing WSYNC is blocked.

In this case, the CPU doesn't get to execute the first cycle of the next instruction, and that instruction starts from the beginning as usual on cycle 105.

- If playfield DMA extends to cycle 105.

Wide playfields, normal playfields with horizontal scrolling, and narrow playfields with high horizontal scroll values can encroach on cycle 105. This causes a one-cycle delay in the CPU restart.

- If refresh DMA extends to cycle 105 or 106.

The first scan line of a character mode line can incur solid playfield DMA during the active region such that refresh DMA is pushed all the way to the end of the scan line. This can cause refresh DMA to occupy cycle 105, resulting in a one-cycle delay for the CPU. If playfield DMA is already occupying cycle 105, however, then it will push refresh DMA to cycle 106, resulting in a two-cycle delay.

These factors mean that there can be up to a three cycle variance in when an instruction following a write to WSYNC finishes execution, not counting interrupts. Therefore, if you are attempting to use a write to WSYNC to establish an event at an exact time on a scan line, your best bet is to write to WSYNC twice during vertical blank or during blank mode lines, ensuring that no DMA interference occurs. You should also ensure that a DLI or VBI does not take place on the scan line as otherwise the interrupt is guaranteed to fire immediately after the instruction that writes to WSYNC.

## Interrupt delays due to WSYNC

Because the 6502 can only respond to interrupts at the end of an instruction, writing to WSYNC can delay interrupt response by the duration of the WSYNC delay - the CPU cannot respond to interrupts until the WSYNC delay ends at the beginning of horizontal blank. This can especially be a problem for DLIs, and thus sometimes polling VCOUNT is a popular alternative.

WSYNC works by pulling the RDY line on the 6502 low, which causes it to extend the next read cycle until RDY goes high again. On stock hardware, this is always an instruction fetch since the write(s) to WSYNC can only occur at the end of the previous instruction and thus RDY will get pulled on the opcode fetch or the second instruction byte fetch. In both of these cases, the next instruction has already started and thus is guaranteed to complete. Thus, the CPU will execute the write to WSYNC, the following instruction, and then begin the interrupt acknowledgment sequence.

The exception is if the NMI occurs early enough during the instruction that writes to WSYNC to trigger the interrupt sequence immediately after it. In that case, the 'next instruction' that the 6502 will stop on during the WSYNC wait will be the interrupt acknowledgment sequence instead of the following instruction. The interrupt handler will execute right after the WSYNC write instruction.

## Deadline for writes to WSYNC

Writes to WSYNC up to cycle 103 wait until the start of horizontal blank on the current scan line. A write to cycle 104 or later is too late and causes a wait until the start of horizontal blank on the next scan line.

## Read-modify-write instructions

Using a read-modify-write instruction such as INC or DEC to write to WSYNC causes special behavior because this is the only case where the cycle immediately following the write to WSYNC is another write cycle. 18 The 6502 does not respond to RDY during a write cycle and therefore always performs this write on the next available cycle regardless. As a result, an INC WSYNC instruction has the useful behavior of ignoring whether the next cycle is occupied by DMA, with the next instruction starting on cycle 105.

The deadline for the last cycle of a RMW instruction to write to WSYNC is still cycle 103. If the instruction executes one cycle later such that two write cycles occur on cycle 103 and 104, the behavior is slightly different: the next instruction will still start on cycle 105, but the second cycle of that instruction will be delayed until cycle 105 on the next scan line.

The 65C02 and 65C816 have different behavior when RDY is asserted during writes which affects this behavior. Both will stop on a write cycle, so it is best to avoid relying on this behavior if compatibility with CPU accelerators is desired.

## Bus activity during WSYNC

Because WSYNC works by asserting the RDY signal to the CPU, it effectively causes the CPU to retry its current read cycle repeatedly until RDY is negated. This will ordinarily be either the first or the second instruction byte of the next instruction after the write to WSYNC. Ordinarily this is of no consequence unless the address corresponds to a read-sensitive hardware device or the WSYNC wait occurs during a period when phantom DMA is occurring (see Scan line timing and Player/missile graphics).

