## 2.1 Basic architecture

The Atari 800 series of computers uses an 8-bit architecture based on the MOS 6502 CPU, assisted by several custom chips and expandable by cartridge, serial, and parallel buses. Figure 1 shows the general architectural block diagram.

Figure 1: System Block Diagram

<!-- image -->

## CPU

The CPU is a MOS 6502, with an 8-bit data bus and 16-bit address bus, capable of addressing 64K of memory. Some versions of the computer use a customized variant called a 6502C, which contains additional HALT logic built-in; it is not to be confused with the later and different 65C02, a revised CMOS version of the 6502.

## ANTIC

The ANTIC custom chip handles DMA, memory refresh, display timing, and playfield graphics decoding for the system. It is the only other bus master in the system, halting the 6502 whenever it needs access to the memory bus for DMA or memory refresh.

## CTIA/GTIA

The GTIA custom chip handles graphics generation, combining playfield data from ANTIC with player/missile graphics data and convert it to color video output.

The earliest computers may have a precedessor of the GTIA called the CTIA, which is missing some graphics functionality. The majority of computers have the GTIA.

GTIA also handles some auxiliary signals such as joystick triggers, console buttons, and the console speaker.

## POKEY

The third custom chip, POKEY, handles sound generation, serial I/O bus data, and keyboard and paddle input.

## PIA (6520)

A 6520 Peripheral Interface Adapter provides joystick directional I/O, serial I/O bus control signals, and on the XL/XE series, MMU control.

Some computers may use the 6820 or 6821/68B21 chips instead. They are pin- and software-compatible with the 6520.

## MMU

The MMU maps memory address ranges to RAM, ROM, hardware, and expansion ports. On later models, it also supports banking in and out the ROMs and bank-switched expansion memory.

## ROM

The operating system firmware is contained in a 10K ROM. Later models expand this to a 16K ROM containing a larger OS including a self-test, and also add an 8K internal BASIC ROM and an 8K game ROM.

## RAM

8K to 128K of RAM is present, depending on the model. 16K, 64K, and 128K are the most common on stock, unmodified machines. Models containing more than 64K have the additional memory accessible as bankswitched expanded memory.

## Cartridge port

The 800 contains two cartridge ports, a left cartridge port and a right cartridge port. Other models, including the 400, dropped the right cartridge port and only have the left port, which can support the same functions as the right port. The cartridge ports can support both reads and writes through up to a 16K aperture.

## Joystick ports

Either two or four joystick ports are present, depending on the model, with the earlier 400/800 having four ports. The 9-pin joystick ports can support joysticks, paddles, driving controls, keypads, and even bidirectional parallel I/O.

## Serial I/O bus

The serial I/O bus supports multiple peripherals on a daisy chain, including disk drives, cassette tape decks, printers, modems, and more exotic devices like MIDI ports. A standard communication protocol at 19200 baud allows the computer to address individual peripherals sharing the SIO bus.

## Parallel Bus Interface (PBI) / Enhanced Cartridge Interface (ECI)

The Parallel Bus Interface on later models allows external logic to interface directly to the address and data buses of the computer for high-speed traffic, particularly for hard drives. The Enhanced Cartridge Interface (ECI) is a variant on some later models which combines the cartridge port with a smaller extra port beside it to provide an equivalent to the PBI.

