## 2.3 Memory system

## Memory bus

The computer has a single memory bus, with 16 address bits addressing 64K of RAM, and an 8-bit wide data bus. Most chips are addressible directly through memory mapping, but only the 6502 and ANTIC can drive the bus as bus masters, with the rest of the chips only responding to memory cycles in their address ranges.

The 6502 drives the bus the majority of the time and ANTIC will steal cycles with higher priority as necessary to generate the display or refresh dynamic RAMs. Only the 6502 can issue write cycles, as ANTIC only issues read or refresh cycles.

## Memory type

Typically the system memory is composed of 4K x 1, 16K x 1, 64K x 1, or 64K x 4 dynamic RAM chips. Thirdparty expansions, especially more modern ones, could use 256K chips or even SDRAM or SRAM.

## Initial memory contents

The contents of memory upon power-up are undefined and should be treated as such. However, in some circumstances they are deterministic or almost deterministic.

The first case is when the computer is powered up after being turned off for a long time. In this case, the RAM will contain block patterns related to the internal organization of the DRAM memory chips. One possible pattern is alternating $00 and $FF bytes.

The second case is if the computer is only turned off for a short period of time before being turned back on. When the power is turned off, the DRAM contents will begin to degrade as the lack of regular refresh causes the memory cells to lose state. This can take anywhere from seconds to minutes, and if power is restored in between, the result will be a random mix of data from the last powered state and bits that have decayed to the base state.

## Floating data bus

Some addresses are not decoded and responded to by any hardware device, leaving the data bus in an undriven state. These include $D100-D1FF and $D600-D7FF with no PBI devices installed. $D500-D5FF with no cartridge, $4000-BFFF on the 400 with the standard 16K RAM configuration, and $C000-CFFF on the 400/800.

Depending on the model, this may either result in a pulled up or floating bus. On an XL and some XE machines, there are pull-up resistors on the data bus which will force the bus to $FF for an unhandled read. On the 400/800 and other XE machines, these pull-ups are missing and the result is a floating data bus. The floating data bus will tend to return the byte that was on the data bus from the previous cycle.

RAM does not drive the data bus during a refresh cycle, so the value on the floating data bus is not changed. However, the floating data bus will reflect the value read by ANTIC if the last cycle was a DMA cycle from a driven location.

When the CPU is suspended by a write to WSYNC, it repeats its current read cycle until the WSYNC condition is cleared by ANTIC. During this time, the bus will repeatedly reflect the data at the location the CPU is trying to read. This can be in turn picked up by ANTIC if one of its DMA channels is reading from an undriven location.

## Floating I/O data bus

On the 800, the system ROMs, PIA, POKEY, and cartridges are connected to a secondary I/O data bus that is split by a pair of data bus transceivers from the main data bus that the CPU, ANTIC, and CTIA/GTIA are connected to. The data buses are connected for some addresses that are not handled by any device, which means that floating data can be read from the I/O data bus separately from the main bus. This is only true on the 800; the 400, XL, XE, and XEGS have all devices on a single data bus.

The following address ranges are decoded for the secondary data bus: $C000-CFFF, $D100-D3FF, $D500FFFF. The address ranges for CTIA/GTIA ($D000-D0FF) and ANTIC ($D400-D4FF) are excluded and occur over the main data bus only.

Reading an unhandled address on the I/O data bus reads the floating bus data on that bus, which is only affected by accesses to that bus. In particular, this means that reads and writes to main memory are not reflected. Writes to any address on the I/O bus will float data on that bus even if no device responds to the write, and this value can persist until the next read on the I/O bus even if other accesses occur to the main bus in between.

As an example, if PEEK(49152) is executed from Atari BASIC running on a cartridge, the value read will most often be 212 ($D4). This is because BASIC reads the supplied address with an LDA ($D4),Y instruction. The first two cycles of this instruction read the instruction bytes $B1 and $D4 from the I/O bus, the next two cycles read the address 49152 ($C000) from RAM at $D4 and $D5 on the main bus, and the last cycle reads the $D4 value from the floating data from the I/O bus at address $C000. (The value will vary in practice because ANTIC may halt the CPU temporarily and read character data from ROM at $E000-E3FF during the instruction.) On the other hand, if BASIC is loaded into RAM, the value will tend to reflect character data because the instruction fetches will no longer occur on the I/O bus.

## Memory refresh

Because dynamic RAM requires periodic refresh to maintain contents, ANTIC does up to nine refresh cycles per scanline to refresh memory. The number of refresh cycles varies depending on playfield DMA requirements since playfield DMA has priority over memory refresh, while the full nine cycles are issued during vertical blank. On each refresh cycle, one row of memory within each memory chip is refreshed. An internal counter within ANTIC increments the refreshed row address with each refresh cycle. Depending on the model of ANTIC chip, this counter is either 7 or 8 bits wide, refreshing 128 or 256 rows (the latter being necessary for some later used memory chips).

While ANTIC is responsible for meeting DRAM refresh requirements solely by itself, any non-refresh access to memory, either by ANTIC or the CPU, will also refresh the accessed memory row. The lowest address bits determine the row. For the 130XE, both main and extended memory banks are refreshed together on any access, though only one may output to the data bus.

On a refresh cycle, the normal data output from the memory chips is suppressed either by disabling the /CAS signal (XL/XE) or by turning off buffers between the memory and the data bus (400/800). The memory decoding logic or MMU also suppresses any I/O or ROM mappings that would otherwise respond to the refresh address supplied by ANTIC. As a result, no device will drive the data bus and it will either float or be pulled up. 1

