## 2.5 Peripheral Interface Adapter (PIA)

The 6520 PIA chip controls several miscellaneous functions within the Atari.

## Addressing

The PIA occupies the $D3xx block of address space and exposes four register locations from $D300-D303. Only the low two address bits are decoded, so each register is repeated 64 times.

## Caution

Ultimate1MB overlays the $D380-D3FF half of the PIA region with its own registers.

## I/O ports

The PIA contains two 8-bit data ports, port A and port B. Each contains eight bits which are individually switchable between input mode or output mode by a data direction register. Port A is controlled by control register PACTL [$D302] and data register PORTA [$D300]; port B uses control register PBCTL [$D303] and data register PORTB [$D301].

The data direction registers DDRA/DDRB and input/output registers ORA/ORB share addresses. In order to read or write the data direction register, bit 2 of the port's control register must be set to 0, and to read or write the I/O register, bit 2 must be set to 1.

Port A is connected to the direction lines of joystick ports 1 and 2. Port B is connected to ports 3 and 4 on the 400/800. The XL/XE models do not have these joystick ports, so port B is used for memory banking and LED control instead.

## I/O direction

Each bit in the data direction register controls whether a bit is in input or output mode. A zero bit sets the bit to input mode, while a one bit enables output for that bit. A bit in the output register is ignored when that bit is set to input, but all bits in the input register are valid even for output bits. This behavior differs between port A and port B. For port A, a bit set to output will read back as the logical AND of the output and external state. This is sometimes used to mask off incoming bits; a bit will read as zero if either the PIA or an external device is pulling the line low. For port B, any bit set to output always reads back the output state regardless of external influence.

## Control lines

The interrupt and proceed lines of the SIO bus are connected to control lines CB1 and CA1 of the PIA, respectively. These are generally unused and disabled by setting bits 0 and 1 of PACTL and PBCTL to zero. They are used by a few devices, though, most notably the 1030 Direct Connect Modem.

Control lines CB2 and CA2, however, are connected to the SIO command and motor control lines, respectively. Bits 3-5 of PACTL/PBCTL are used to control the line state and should be set to 110 for a low state or 111 for a

high state. 2 The command line is pulled low by the Atari while a command is being sent to an SIO device; the motor line is pulled low when a cassette tape deck should begin recording or playback.

The control lines can be used to issue an IRQ to the CPU, but this is seldom useful unless an external SIO device is specially made to take advantage of this ability.

Typically the values $34 and $3C are written to PACTL/PBCTL; this disables interrupts, raises or lowers the CA2/CB2 line, and keeps the PORTA/PORTB register in data mode so the OS VBI routine can read the joystick ports.

## Interrupt status/enable bits

Bits 7 and 6 of PACTL and PBCTL indicate interrupt status of CA1/CB1 and CA2/CB2, respectively. They are read-only and their values are ignored on write. A set bit indicates a pending interrupt, and if the interrupt is enabled, an IRQ is also issued to the CPU.

Reading the input register for a port resets both interrupt bits for that port. This must be the input register; reading the data direction register has no effect on interrupt status. This has implications for PIA interrupt handlers, which must either require that ORA/ORB be active when PIA IRQs are active and unmasked or temporarily switch from DDRA/DDRB to ORA/ORB to acknowledge the interrupt.

Unlike with POKEY, disabling interrupts does not clear the pending interrupt bit, and interrupts can be flagged by edge detection even if interrupts are disabled. However, switching CA2/CB2 to output mode (1xx) does clear the corresponding interrupt status (bit 6).

## Reset behavior

The PIA is reset only on power on on the 800; it is also reset by the Reset button on XL/XE models. When the PIA is reset, all registers are cleared to $00. This disables all interrupts, switches PORTA/PORTB to the data direction register, and sets all peripheral port bits to input mode.

## Floating inputs

On the XL/XE series, unused signal lines on PIA port B are not tied to ground or +5V and are therefore left floating. This creates a condition where the value read on those bits via the PORTB register can drift over time. Specifically, if unused port B bits are switched from outputting a 1 to input mode, they will read as 1 for a while before eventually stabilizing at 0. If the last output value was a 0, the read bit in input mode will immediately be a 0 with no delay.

While this can cause port B to return random data, it is not usually a problem in practice because only unused port B bits are affected and it only occurs for bits in input mode. On XL/XE systems, PIA port B is usually set to output mode on all bits early in initialization and kept that way during normal operation.

The unused, floating port B bits for unmodified hardware are as follows:

- 1200XL: bits 1-6
- 600XL, 800XL, 65XE, 1450XL(D): bits 2-6
- 130XE: bit 6
- XEGS: bits 2-5

The approximate time delay for the 1-to-0 transition, based on measurements on real hardware, is in the range

[2] [ATA82] III.20 indicates that bits 4-5 should be set to 1. While this is the most useful setting, bits 3-5 can also be set to other values to access six more control modes for the CA2 line. For instance, a value of 000 will reconfigure the pin for input, resulting in it being passively pulled up to the true state.

of 100-500 ms. Delays vary between individual bits, between systems and can even vary widely on the same system. For instance, one system may show fairly consistent 160-190ms delays among its bits, whereas another may show 300-500ms. In any case, it is slow enough that it can even be detected from BASIC.

The 400/800 has pull-ups on all port B lines and leaves none floating. Port A is not susceptible to this issue either as it has internal pull-ups within the PIA.

For systems that have add-on extended memory, the additional bits used by the memory expansion are expected to be connected to additional hardware such that they would always be pulled up, preventing those bits from floating. This is notably not true for Ultimate1MB, though, since it implements extended memory by shadowing writes to the PIA instead of physically connecting to the PIA's port B. Therefore, on a U1MB system, it is possible to have bits that both float in input mode and control extended memory.

## Spurious interrupts

Switching from output to input mode on the CA2/CB2 control lines can cause spurious interrupts to be flagged in the control register. For CA2, this happens when positive edge detection is enabled (PACTL[3:5] = 010 or 011) after the output has been pulled low recently (110). For CB2, an output low-to-high transition must be followed by any input mode (PBCTL[3:5] = 110 to 111, then 0xx). When the input mode is selected, bit 6 will become set and an IRQ will be requested from the CPU if the PIA interrupt is enabled (PACTL/PBCTL[3] = 1).

The CB2 case is particularly nasty as it corresponds to the SIO command line and the required transition is part of the normal SIO protocol. Merely writing $08 into PBCTL can cause an infinite series of interrupts if an appropriate IRQ routine is not registered to clear the unexpected PIA interrupt.

