## 2.6 Bank switching

Bank switching allows the CPU to access more memory than would ordinarily be reachable via the 64K address space dictated by its 16 address lines by multiplexing address regions based on bank switching registers. On the XL series, this allows ROM to be selectively disabled, permitting access to 62K of memory.

## ROM control

While the 400/800 use PIA port B to interface with joystick ports 3 and 4, the XL/XE computers only have two joystick ports. The otherwise unused port B is instead used to enable and disable the system ROMs.

Bit 0 controls the OS ROM at $C000-CFFF and $D800-FFFF. A '1' bit enables the OS ROM.

Bit 1 controls the BASIC ROM at $A000-BFFF (except on the 1200XL, which has no built-in BASIC). A '0' bit enables the BASIC ROM. Note that this is inverted from the OS ROM bit (bit 0).

Bit 7 controls the self-test ROM at $5000-57FF. A '0' bit enables the self-test ROM, if the OS ROM is also enabled. If the OS ROM is disabled, the self-test ROM is also disabled regardless of the state of bit 7.

Pull-ups ensure that port B bits 0 and 7, and also bit 1 on non-1200XL machines, are held high if those bits are switched to input mode on the PIA. Since the PIA switches all port bits to inputs on reset, this guarantees that the OS ROM is enabled and the BASIC and self-test ROMs are disabled on system reset.

Clearing bit 0 and setting bits 1 and 7 disables all system ROMs, enabling access to 62K of RAM. The 2K block of hardware registers at $D000-D7FF cannot be disabled.

## Writes to ROM

The MMU logic maps addresses to circuitry solely based on address. This means that any writes to addresses that are currently assigned to kernel ROM, BASIC ROM, or cartridge ROM are ignored and do not affect the

underlying RAM. It is not possible to 'write through' the ROM as on some other platforms.

## BASIC ROM overlap (XL/XE only)

The priority in the $A000-BFFF address range is cartridge ROM, then BASIC ROM, and then RAM. If both the cartridge and BASIC ROM are enabled in that area, the cartridge is visible.

## Game ROM (XEGS only)

On the XEGS, setting bit 6 of PIA port B to 0 enables the Missile Command game ROM at $A000-BFFF. This has lower priority than the BASIC ROM and will therefore be overridden by BASIC if port B bit 1 is also set to 0.

