## 2.9 Examples

## Caverns of Mars

This game configures the upper four bits of port A as output in order to force them to zero, and fails to read the joystick if this is not reflected in the values read.

## MidiTrack III

Monitors the CA1 (SIO proceed) input of the PIA for synchronization pulses without having IRQA1 enabled.

## R-Verter handler software

Monitors CA1 (SIO proceed) and CB1 (SIO interrupt) inputs to the PIA without either IRQA1 or IRQB1 enabled.

[4] [ATAXL] p.15

## WarGames

This game has a unique check to verify that $C000-CFFF is not populated with either RAM or ROM on an 800 system. If the routines in this region do not match the checksum for the 1200XL or XL/XE ver. 2 OS, the game writes a byte to a single location in this range and then reads a series of addresses, checking whether the data read from any of those addresses changes. Since the check routine is running from RAM, this relies on the write being floated on the I/O data bus without being disturbed by the instruction fetches. The check will pass if $C000-CFFF either contains RAM or returns floating I/O bus data, but will fail if it is ROM or main floating bus data.

## Atari Operating System Rev. A/B

The RAM sizing test for OS-A/B tests for RAM by twice complementing the byte at the beginning of each 4K of memory starting at $1000 and checking that the value read back matches each time. This test normally stops at $C000 due to the floating I/O bus, relying on the instruction fetches from ROM to immediately overwrite the written value on the I/O data bus. This test will also stop at $C000-CFFF if the range returns a constant value due to either ROM or a pulled-up data bus. If the system is reconfigured so that the memory sizing code runs from the main data bus or that $C000-CFFF returns floating data from a different bus, the sizing code can incorrectly determine that range to be RAM.

