## B.1 Raw geometry

## Single density

A single density disk contains 40 tracks of 18 sectors with 128 bytes per sector, giving a total of 90KB of storage. The tracks are spaced at 48 tracks per inch (tpi), so a more modern 80 track drive with 96tpi needs to doublestep to read and write a single density disk. Only the first (bottom) side is used.

## Enhanced (medium) density

An enhanced or medium density disk contains 40 tracks of 26 sectors with 128 bytes per sector, giving 130KB of storage. Track density is the same as for single density.

## Double density

A double density disk contains 40 tracks of 18 sectors with 256 bytes per sector, giving 180KB of storage. Track density is the same as for single density.

For compatibility with the OS boot routines, the first three sectors of a double-density disk -  track 0, sector 1 through 3 - are exposed to the computer as 128 byte sectors. However, they are still encoded on the physical disk as 256 byte sectors like the rest of the disk. The disk drive firmware extends the sector to 256 bytes on write and discards the extra bytes on read. The 128 bytes used are at the beginning of the sector and the other 128 bytes are usually $00.

## Track/sector number conversion

All disk formats use the same method to convert between the sector numbers used by the SIO disk protocol and the track/sector numbers used on the physical disk: the sectors are numbered in sequential order starting at track 0 and going up to track 39. For a single density disk, SIOsector = track*18 + sector.

For the XF551's DSDD format, SIO sectors 1-720 are on side 0 (bottom) and SIO sectors 721-1440 are on side 1 (top). The sectors are in reverse order on side 1, so SIO sectors 721, 722, 723... are on track 39 sector 18, track 39 sector 17, track 39 sector 16, etc.

## Index position

Neither the index mark in the track nor the index sensor is used. Tracks may start at any angular position on the disk, and in particular sectors may lie across the index position. During formatting, tracks are laid out such that there is skew between tracks and sector 1 lies at a different angular position on each track.

