## B.2 Bit encoding

## Bit cell encoding

All data bits are encoded into a pair of bit cells before being written to disk. The first cell is the clock cell, used to maintain synchronization of the decoder's bit cell clock, and the second cell is the data cell. A '1' bit in either cell corresponds to a flux transition on disk, where the local magnetic field reverses, and detected on read as a pulse; a '0' bit is the absence of flux transition and corresponding read pulse.

Bits are stored on disk in MSB-to-LSB order. No framing (start/stop) bits are used, so bit- and byte-level

synchronization is achieved through special synchronization bytes, and then maintained from then on for the field being read. There are no requirements for bit or byte timing to be synchronized between fields.

## FM encoding (single density)

On single density disks, frequency modulation (FM) encoding is used. Each data bit is encoded as a pair of bit cells, the first being a clock bit that is always 1, and the second being the data bit. The clock bit ensures that the decoder sees enough clock transitions to be able to lock onto the bit cell timing used by the encoder. A bit cell is 4µs long at 288 RPM, giving approximately 52,000 bit cells per revolution, or ~3,250 raw data bytes per track.

For synchronization at the byte level, a special pattern of clock bits is used for data bytes that mark the beginning of address and data fields. For these, some of the clock bits encoded as 0 instead of 1 (missing flux transition), giving a pattern of $C7 instead of $FF.

Note that the decoder does not always validate the clock bits. They are checked in order to identify the special mark bytes, but otherwise do not need to be set as long as enough 1 bits are present in both clock and data bit cells to satisfy timing requirements. This is exploited by some copy protection schemes that omit clock bits within the data field to encode a $C7 clock byte, allowing the data field of one sector to overlap the address field of another to fit an otherwise impossible number of sectors on a track (36!).

## MFM encoding (enhanced and double density)

The increased capacity of enhanced and double density formats is achieved with modified frequency modulation (MFM) encoding, which reduces the density of flux transitions (1 bits) and uses tighter timing to cram in more bit cells. Unlike FM, which always encodes a 1 bit in clock cells, MFM encodes a 0 in a clock cell if either of the two adjacent data cells has a 1. This allows the bit cell to be halved to 2µs at 288 RPM, encoding ~104,100 bit cells per revolution and ~6,500 raw data bytes per track.

Like FM, unusual clock bit patterns are used for synchronization, but the patterns are different. For MFM, a sequence of three $A1 bytes is used prior to each DAM/IDAM, with a clock pattern of $0A. In some literature, this is given as a combined shift pattern of $4489. The DAM/IDAM itself has a normal clock pattern.

## Capture range

Testing on a 1050 drive shows that the FDC is able to synchronize to bitstreams within approximately 83-127% of nominal bit period for FM and 86-122% for MFM. This margin is needed to accommodate spindle speed variations for both the reading and writing drives. If the writing drive is 5% slow and the reading drive is 5% fast, the FDC effectively sees a bit cell period 90% of nominal.

