## B.4 Data field

Following the address field is the data field for the sector, marked by a Data Address Mark (DAM). The DAM is normally $FB, but can also be values $F8-FA to indicate a deleted or custom type sector. This is interpreted as an error by Atari-compatible disk drives and used by some copy protection schemes since it cannot be written through the standard disk protocol.

As with the address field, the DAM is preceded by three $A1 synchronization bytes in MFM, and encoded with $C7 clock in FM. It is then immediately followed by the data bytes for the sector, and then two CRC bytes.

Similarly to the IDAM, four zero data bits are required prior to the DAM for it to be recognized in FM; it won't work with 1 bits prior even with synchronized bit timing. This is not required for MFM.

## Address mark types

Although there are four different address marks, only the 1771 FDC supports all four types.  The 179X/279X and 1772 only report bit 1 and thus treat $F8 and $F9 the same, and $FA and $FB the same.

## Data inversion

The original Atari 810 Disk Drive used a floppy drive controller that had an inverted data bus without a compensating inversion between the FDC and the CPU. As a result, all data is written to and read from disk inverted by this drive. This practice was maintained for compatibility reasons and continued with the MFMencoded enhanced- and double-density formats. However, synchronization, address, and CRC bytes are generated by the FDC itself and therefore not inverted.

