## B.5 CRC algorithm

Both index marks and sector data are protected by a 16-bit CRC to reasonably detect data corruption. The CRC has a polynomial of `x^16+x^12+x^5+1`. The initial value of the CRC register is all ones ($FFFF), with the checksum being shifted left as new bits are shifted in on the right, MSB first. The resulting CRC value is then stored or checked against the CRC stored after the checked region, stored MSB-first.

The following Python 3 code computes the disk CRC-16:

```python
def crc16(data:bytes, initial_value:int = 0xFFFF) -> int:
    crc = initial_value
    # for each data byte
    for c in data:
        # add in next byte
        crc ^= c << 8
        # compute crc*2^8 mod P
        for i in range(0, 8):
            # multiply CRC by 2
            crc <<= 1
            # modulo by polynomial
            if crc & 0x10000:
                crc ^= 0x11021
    return crc
```

As with other CRC algorithms, this can be computed more quickly by precomputing a table of 16-bit modulo values (v × x^16 mod P) for all 256 byte values P, to quickly fold each group of 8 bits as they are shifted out the left:

```python
crc16_table = [crc16(bytes([x]), 0) for x in range(0, 256)]

def crc16_fast(data:bytes, initial_value:int = 0xFFFF) -> int:
    crc = initial_value
    for c in data:
        crc = ((crc << 8) & 0xFFFF) ^ crc16_table[c ^ (crc >> 8)]
    return crc
```

This CRC algorithm is also available as the crc\_hqx() function in the binascii module:

```python
>>> import binascii
>>> sd_sector1 = b'\xFE\x00\x00\x01\x00'
>>> ed_sector1 = b'\xA1\xA1\xA1\xFE\x00\x00\x01\x00'
>>> '{:02X}'.format(binascii.crc_hqx(sd_sector1, 0xFFFF))
'D2C3'
>>> '{:02X}'.format(binascii.crc_hqx(ed_sector1, 0xFFFF))
'EA2D'
```

## FM format

For address fields in the FM format, the CRC includes the ID Address Mark (IDAM) byte of $FE, followed by the track, head, sector, and sector size bytes, for a total of five bytes. The address CRC of the first boot sector (track 0, sector 1) is $D2C3.

For data fields in the FM format, the CRC includes the Data Address Mark (DAM) byte of $F8-FB, followed by the 128 data bytes, for 129 bytes covered. These are the raw data bytes as seen by the FDC, so they are inverted from the data bytes seen by the computer. The CRC for a sector of all $00s as seen by the computer ($FF on disk) is $A580.

## MFM format

The basic method of CRC calculation and checking is the same as for MFM, but the bytes covered differ slightly due to changes in synchronization. For both address and data fields, the three $A1 synchronization bytes before the IDAM or DAM are also included in the CRC, giving a total of eight bytes checksummed for addresses and 132 for data fields. The CRCs for track 0, sector 1 on an enhanced density disk containing all $00s from the computer's perspective are $EA2D and $9A17.

