## 6.10 Cycle timing

The following sections all assume that a write has taken place on cycle 65 of a scan line. In a normal width mode E line, this would be immediately before ANTIC reads data for positions $8C-$8F.

## Color register changes

A write to a color register takes place one color clock later, so a write to COLPM0 at cycle 65 shows up on screen at $81.

## P/M priority changes

A write to PRIOR bits 0-3 or 5 takes place two color clocks later, so a write at cycle 65 shows up on screen at $82.

The fifth player bit (PRIOR bit 4) normally also takes place two color clocks later at $82. However, on some systems this circuit is temperature sensitive and shows a one-cycle artifact until $83 when the system has warmed up.

Table 18: Timing for mid-screen writes to GTIA registers

<!-- image -->

| Changed                 | Timing             |
|-------------------------|--------------------|
| Color register          | $81 (1 cclk)       |
| PRIOR bits 0-3, 5       | $82 (2 cclks)      |
| PRIOR bit 4             | $82-83 (2-3 cclks) |
| PRIOR bits 6-7          | $83-85 (3-5 cclks) |
| Player/missile image    | $83 (3 cclks)      |
| Player/missile position | $85 (5 cclks)      |

## P/M graphics changes

A write to a player/missile graphics register only takes effect when the sprite retriggers and its shift register is reloaded. The delay for this is three color clocks. A write to GRAFP0 at cycle 65 would only take effect for player 0 at $83 or later.

## P/M position/size changes

A write to a player/missile position or size register must take place five color clocks in advance to take effect. This means that a write on cycle 65 can prevent display of a player at or right of $85, and reposition it to $85 or farther. Effectively, both the old and the new player image are clipped on the left side of $85.

Changes to the size register will take effect immediately, with the remaining bits in the shift register shifting out at the new width. However, due to the design of the stretching circuitry, switching between double and quadruple width is slightly erratic, with the double-to-quadruple change showing a slightly uneven relation and the quadruple-to-double change being slightly non-monotonic. Changes to and from normal width are always well behaved.

## GTIA mode changes

A change to bits 6-7 of PRIOR takes place between 3-5 color clocks after the write, primarily after 4 color clocks with a possible cycle of artifact on each side. For a write on cycle 65, the change takes place at positions $83$85. The nature of the artifact on-screen depends on the exact transition:

- Mode 8 to mode 9/11: Clean transition after 4 color clocks.
- Mode 8 to mode 10: Clean transition after 3 color clocks.
- Mode 9/11 to mode 8: 1-2 color clock transition after 3 color clocks. At $83, the mode 9/11 pixel is cut in half and the playfield is absent, showing background color if there are no players or missiles. Pseudo mode E display begins at $84, but the data from $83 is displayed instead. (Presumably this is an artifact of timing sensitivity in disabling the mode 10 delay line.)
- Mode 10 to mode 8: One color clock transition after 4 color clocks.

## Machine-specific Behavior Warning

On some systems, the artifact at $84 does not occur when switching from mode 9/11 to mode 8.

