## 6.2 Display generation

## Horizontal positions

Horizontal and vertical positions of graphics generated by GTIA can be described in 8-bit coordinates. Numerical positions are used directly with player/missile graphics and can also be mapped to playfield graphics.

For horizontal positions, the full scanline consists of 228 color clocks, with a visible range of $22-DD (188 color clocks). The first color clock just to the right of the center is at $80. P/M graphics are positioned according to their left edge, so a position of $22 is just barely visible touching the left side, $80 aligns the left edge to the center, and $DE is just barely off the screen on the right. These position values are written into the HPOSP0-3 or HPOSM0-3 to horizontally position player or missle graphics, respectively.

Narrow width playfields from ANTIC are displayed at color clocks $40-BF (128 color clocks), while normal width playfields are displayed at $30-CF (160 color clocks). Following this pattern, wide playfields are mapped to positions $20-DF (192 color clocks), but clipped to display only within $2C-DD (178 color clocks). The left edge is clipped by ANTIC by 12 color clocks, and displays background color even in hires modes. However, P/M graphics can still display within this range $22-2B.

## Vertical positions

Vertical positions are by scanline, with the maximum range being 8-247 (240 visible scanlines), and the center at the top of line 128. Both the playfield and P/M graphics are limited to the same vertical range. GTIA does not use vertical positions, but ANTIC does so when fetching P/M graphics for GTIA.

By convention, the standard normal-width Gr.0 screen covers 32-223 (192 visible scanlines). This is only an

operating system convention, however.

## Blanking and sync regions

Horizontal/vertical blanking and sync are generated by through coordination between ANTIC and GTIA.

Horizontal blank timing is determined and signaled to GTIA by ANTIC through the ANx bus. GTIA maintains its own horizontal counter in parallel to ANTIC, which is resynchronized when horizontal blank starts and then used to trigger horizontal sync and color burst for the next line. Graphics processing is suppressed until ANTIC signals end of horizontal blank.

ANTIC does not explicitly signal vertical blank to GTIA and instead simply holds horizontal blank active during vertical blank regions. GTIA's internal horizontal blank counter free-runs during this time to continue triggering horizontal sync pulses every 114 cycles. This also causes GTIA to continue emitting color burst in vertical blank, which is not normally present in broadcast signals. There are also no equalization pulses.

Vertical sync timing is explicitly signaled by ANTIC through a special ANx bus code, during lines 251-253 for NTSC and 275-277 for PAL/SECAM. This is done for the entirety of those lines, so this also requires GTIA's horizontal counter to free-run to continue driving horizontal sync pulses. GTIA extends sync during this period so that sync pulses are nearly inverted during this period, with the video signal at sync level for most of the time and briefly returning to 0V during the horizontal sync periods.

Figure 13: GTIA NTSC vertical sync waveform

<!-- image -->

First of three vertical sync lines (top / yellow) vs. a blank line (bottom/gray), showing the horizontal sync pulse extended across the entire active region until shortly before the start of the next sync pulse. The start of horizontal sync is unchanged. The raised serration pulse is before the normal horizontal sync and is not an inverted hsync. (Captured from NTSC 800XL.)

## Opening the vertical border

As described in the ANTIC display list section, entering vertical blank with a hires mode in ANTIC's Instructrion Register (IR) can affect the way GTIA processes vertical blank. The specific conditions required are:

- The last display list instruction byte fetched by ANTIC corresponds to a hires mode (2, 3, or F). Typically, the last instruction byte is a JVB instruction ($41), which prevents this bug from happening.
- Playfield DMA is enabled.

When these two conditions are both true, ANTIC fails to hold horizontal blank active and instead runs a normal visible region. This enables graphics generation in GTIA, including both playfield and P/M graphics. However, as neither playfield DMA nor player/missile DMA are active in vertical blank, both graphics types have limited usability.

The cause of this is the graphics encoding logic in ANTIC. The graphics shift register is emptied by the time vertical blank starts, so the lores logic only emits background encoding (%000) and doesn't affect vertical blank. However, the hires encoding logic needs to set AN2=1 for the playfield region regardless of the playfield data. ANTIC fails to disable this in vertical blank and this disrupts the encoding of the blanking and sync signals.

This condition can occur unexpectedly when changing screens because the instruction register (IR) only needs

Figure 14: ANTIC mis-signaling to GTIA during hires bug

<!-- image -->

Capture from NTSC composite output and ANx bus signals between ANTIC and GTIA during hires bug, with wide playfield enabled until halfway into vertical sync. From top to bottom: CH1 (yellow) is composite video, CH2 (cyan) is AN0, CH3 (purple) is AN1, and CH4 (blue) is AN2. Pictured are scan lines 241-259, with line 247 being a hires mode F line.

The pulses at the bottom in AN2 are ANTIC sending hires pixels during the active region, which is expected during line 247 but erroneous starting with line 248. This causes ANTIC to signal %111 (two hires pixels on) instead of %011 (horizontal blank with hires enabled) during the pre-vsync lines, and corrupts the %001 code (vertical sync) into %101 (off+on hires pixels). AN2 reverts back to 0 and normal output is restored when the playfield is disabled, but the mis-signaling has also shifted GTIA's horizontal sync timing for the remainder of vertical blank.

to hold a hires mode regardless of whether the mode line is displayed. Neither disabling display list DMA nor disabling playfield DMA clears the IR. Thus, turning off a display list mid-screen can leave a hires mode in the IR, which then causes problems when playfield DMA is re-enabled later in vertical blank.

## Effects on vertical sync

The most serious effect of this bug is a disruption of vertical sync. If the bug is triggered and playfield DMA is left active across the normal vertical sync time, ANTIC will send a hires playfield %01 pattern (AN0-2 = %101) instead of vertical sync (ANx = %001) during the active horizontal region.

Most CRTs and some modern displays will still maintain horizontal sync while attempting to free-run the vertical scan, resulting in the screen rolling slowly vertically due to the computer's slightly non-standard vertical scan rate. When the display predicts 262.5 lines with the computer only producing 262, the screen will roll upwards slowly at about once every 8.7 seconds (262 ÷ 0.5 frames). Other displays will blank when they lose vertical sync.

## Effects on horizontal sync

Outside of the vertical sync region, it is also possible to affect horizontal sync timing. ANTIC still enforces horizontal blank during vertical blank, so the normal horizontal blank periods cannot be overridden. However, it is possible to shift GTIA's horizontal blank and sync timing away from ANTIC's timing by resetting GTIA's horizontal counter, which happens whenever horizontal blank starts. This happens when playfield DMA is turned on midline in vertical blank when the IR holds a hires mode line.

Normally, ANTIC sends blanking codes (ANx=%01x) to GTIA during horizontal blank, and then color codes during the active region. GTIA uses the leading edge of horizontal blank to reset its own horizontal counter at the start of horizontal blank and synchronize to ANTIC's horizontal counter. GTIA then uses its horizontal counter to drive horizontal sync timing. However, in vertical blank and except for vertical sync, ANTIC sends only horizontal blanking signal. As there are no trailing edges for GTIA to sync to, it instead free-runs its counter, resetting it automatically after 228 color clocks to maintain previous horizontal timing.

If playfield DMA is enabled during vertical blank with the IR containing a hires mode, however, the hires bug will cause ANTIC to override the normal blanking code from %01x to %11x, sending a playfield code in the active region during vertical blank. This introduces a leading edge of horizontal blank at the right edge of the playfield instead of the normal right edge of the display, thus also shifting GTIA's horizontal timing. Turning playfield DMA back off mid-line can shift it even more. GTIA will then continue this bogus horizontal timing until it sees another trailing edge at the normal time, either because playfield DMA was re-enabled or normal display resumes at line 8. Thus, the shifted horizontal sync can only persist until the end of vertical blank at most.

## Timing for bogus horizontal sync

Because ANTIC will only send the bogus %11x blanking code within the horizontal bounds of the display, toggling playfield DMA in the borders will have the same effect as toggling it at the border.

Figure 15: Shifted horizontal sync due to hires bug

<!-- image -->

Scan lines 239-241 with mode F on line 239, DMACTL disabled at start of vertical blank (above / yellow) and enabled at narrow width at start of vertical blank (below / green). The bug causes ANTIC to start horizontal sync early at the right edge of the narrow playfield on line 240, which causes GTIA to also emit the horizontal sync pulse early and shortening line 240. Subsequent lines 241+ are normal length but shifted early compared to lines 8-239. (Captured from NTSC 130XE.)

## Horizontal sync timing during vertical sync

During vertical sync, the horizontal sync logic is modified to instead emit serration pulses in the middle of the vertical sync pulse. This is done within GTIA by shifting the end of horizontal sync from shortly after hsync start to near the end of the horizontal line count, stretching the hsync pulse to almost the full line time.

As a result, toggling playfield DMA has a somewhat different effect on vertical sync. The horizontal counter is still reset upon disabling playfield DMA, but the effect on sync from toggling playfield DMA is more immediate: the serration starts immediately upon enabling the playfield and ends at hsync start time upon disabling it, instead of starting and ending at the hsync start/end times.

## Safe timing for re-enabling playfield DMA

If the instruction register (IR) does not contain a hires mode, then playfield DMA can safely be turned on at any time during vertical blank as ANTIC forces blanking output for the entire period. However, if it might contain a hires mode, then careful timing is needed to avoid disturbing composite sync.

Vertical sync occurs over three scan lines. In NTSC, it occupies lines 251-253, and in PAL, 275-277. Re-enabling playfield DMA after line 253/277 thus avoids fouling vertical sync.

Avoiding disruption of horizontal sync is more difficult. To avoid accidentally shifting GTIA horizontal sync timing, playfield DMA can be re-enabled at any time during vertical blank after vertical sync but wide playfield width must be used. Wide playfield must be used as it extends all the way to normal horizontal blank, ensuring that horizontal blank starts at the correct time. If normal or narrow playfield is enabled with the hires bug, then ANTIC will start horizontal blank at the right edge of the playfield and shift GTIA's horizontal sync early until the end of vertical blank. Note that only the displayed width matters; a horizontally scrolled normal width playfield counts as normal width for purposes here, despite fetching wide width.

Once vertical blank has ended at the start of line 8, the playfield can be safely enabled at any time and width without affecting H-sync. This is because once the visible range of lines 8-247 has been entered, ANTIC no longer holds blanking active across the active region and sends background code instead of blanking code between horizontal blank and the edges of the playfield. This makes the start of horizontal blank and thus GTIA's horizontal sync timing consistent regardless of the playfield state.

