## 6.3 Color encoding

## Color registers

For the most part, colors are encoded in GTIA through a palette of color registers, where displayed data refers to a color register and that register provides the actual color used. Changing the color register changes the color of all objects using that color register.

There are nine write-only color registers on the GTIA. COLBK is the background/border color register, COLPF03 are the playfield color registers, and COLPM0-3 are the player/missile color registers.

## Color encoding

The high four bits of each color register encodes the hue, with 0 being a special value indicating no color (grayscale). Bits 1-3 encode the luminance (brightness) of the color, with 000 being the darkest and 111 being the brightest. Note that the luminance does not affect the saturation of the color, so a luminance of 0 does not mean black if hue is non-zero. The two fields together allow for 128 distinct colors.

Bit 0 of any data written to a color register is ignored. Although the GTIA can display 256 colors, this is only possible through the special 16 luminance mode and not through the color registers. The lowest luminance bit is always 0 for any output from a color register.

## A word on colors

The actual colors produced by GTIA differ for each computer, depending on the setting of a tuning pot inside the computer and also the display monitor hooked up to it. This has led to a lot of disagreement about what colors result from each hue value. Even official Atari documentation differs. For instance, the Atari BASIC Reference Manual and the Hardware Manual specify that hues 1 and 15 should have different colors, whereas the 400/800 Service Manual advises adjusting the SALT color bar test pattern so that they have the same color. As such, there is no single authoritative, official answer on what colors each hue value should provide . This must be kept in mind when choosing color values.

Another important issue is that the versions of the GTIA produced for the three main TV encoding standards NTSC, PAL, and SECAM - all differ in the way they encode color.

## NTSC color encoding

An NTSC GTIA produces color by phase shifting a square wave at the same frequency as the NTSC color subcarrier. This generates different, evenly-spaced hues. Because the strength of the color signal is independent

of the brightness, colors with low brightness are much more saturated than ones with higher brightness. Hue value 0 does not produce any color signal and therefore produces pure grays.

The TV's color circuitry is synchronized to GTIA's color output by means of a color burst emitted during horizontal blank. The phase of this signal corresponds to a light yellow-orange color, sometimes called 'gold.' GTIA then produces colors by emitting a color subcarrier with various phase shifts from the color burst, with all of the phase shifts evenly spaced. Hue 1 has one unit of phase delay, and each successive hue has additional multiples of delay added. The delay is nominally around 24°. Ascending hues, and therefore increasing delays, produce colors of orange, red, purple, blue, cyan, green, lime, and finally light yellow-orange again.

The delay between the hue phases is adjustable by a trimpot on the motherboard. This affects each delay stage and therefore has greater effect on higher hue numbers. The last hue, hue 15, varies the most as it is at the end of all delay stages and therefore has the most sensitivity to the color adjustment. Depending on the adjustment, its output can range from green, to yellow, to even orange if it wraps around past hue 1. In contrast, hue 1 varies very little except due to display differences, and low-numbered hues have less variation between systems.

## NTSC brightness encoding

The four-bit brightness value specified in color registers or produced by blending is converted to a brightness (luminance) signal with roughly equal steps, with 0 = black and 15 = white. There are two quirks in this conversion in hardware to be aware of, however.

The first quirk is that brightness levels 7 and 8 can be spaced closer together than the rest of the steps, almost identical.

The second quirk is that brightness level 0 is 'blacker than black.' This is because of a difference between blanking level and black level in most NTSC varieties (except for NTSC-J), where blanking is at 0 IRE, black is at 7.5 IRE, and white is at 100 IRE. The Atari encodes brightness level 0 at blanking level, putting it at about -8% on a scale of black to white.

## PAL color encoding

PAL encodes color differently than NTSC, and thus the PAL GTIA uses a different strategy to generate colors. The main issue is that one of the color subcarrier axes reverses phases on every scan line, so different phases are required to produce the same color. Like the NTSC GTIA, the PAL GTIA uses a delay line to produce different phases, but different phases are used for even and odd scan lines, and the spacing between the hues is also not even.

The phases used by the PAL GTIA for the various colors are as follows, in terms of delays (angles are ideal given a 22.5° delay):

|   Hue | Even lines   | Odd lines    | Ideal UV angle   |
|-------|--------------|--------------|------------------|
|     1 | 1            | 5            | 135.0°           |
|     2 | 0            | 6            | 112.5°           |
|     3 | 7 (inverted) | 7            | 90.0°            |
|     4 | 6 (inverted) | 0 (inverted) | 67.5°            |
|     5 | 5 (inverted) | 1 (inverted) | 45.0°            |
|     6 | 4 (inverted) | 2 (inverted) | 22.5°            |
|     7 | 2 (inverted) | 4 (inverted) | 337.5°           |
|     8 | 1 (inverted) | 5 (inverted) | 315.0°           |

Table 14: PAL GTIA color encodings

|   Hue | Even lines   | Odd lines    | Ideal UV angle   |
|-------|--------------|--------------|------------------|
|     9 | 0 (inverted) | 6 (inverted) | 292.5°           |
|    10 | 7            | 7 (inverted) | 270.0°           |
|    11 | 5            | 1            | 225.0°           |
|    12 | 4            | 2            | 202.5°           |
|    13 | 3            | 3            | 180.0 °          |
|    14 | 2            | 4            | 157.5°           |
|    15 | 1            | 5            | 135.0°           |

Hue 1 is used for the color burst, which uses an angle of 135° and 225° on alternating lines, the latter of which is converted back to 135° in UV space by the alternating line inversion. The reversal of the color subcarrier direction between scan lines means that colors can display different hues between even and off scan lines depending on the color adjustment.

The greater complexity of the encoding scheme means that encoded colors from a PAL system have less variance than an NTSC system, and the 'correct' color adjustment for PAL is more apparent. Hues 1 and 15 are always the same, for instance, because they are hardcoded to the same delays. The offset due to inversion on hues 3-10 is always 180 ° regardless of the adjustment. Finally, while the stable reference color on NTSC is hue 1, on PAL it is hue 13.

Regarding the actual colors produced, the U-V color encoding space used by PAL is related to the I-Q color encoding space used by NTSC by a flip and a 33° rotation. The color burst emitted by NTSC systems lies at 180° in the U-V coordinate space. While NTSC systems nominally have their colors spaced by 23-26°, in the PAL encoding they are spaced by uneven multiples of 22.5°, leading to wider gaps between hues 6 and 7 and hues 10 and 11.

## PAL color blending

To combat hue shifting problems that occur with NTSC, PAL reverses the phase direction of the color subcarrier on alternating scanlines. This has the effect of reversing the direction of phase errors as well. For instance, if a signal transmission issue caused color signal phase to advance on each scan line between the encoder and the decoder, this would result in alternating increasing and decreasing angles in U-V space. Decoders can take advantage of this by combining color from adjacent scan lines, canceling the phase error at the cost of decreased saturation. A common way is to average in the color from the previous scan line via a delay line.

This effect can be used to blend colors between scan lines. Alternating mode 9 and 11 lines, for instance, will mix the gray level from the mode 9 lines with the color from the mode 11 lines, producing a more pseudo-256 color mode. Note that the blending effect only pertains to chroma and not luma.

