## 6.4 Artifacting

Composite video encodes both brightness (luma) and color (chroma) together into the same signal. The decoder separates these imperfectly, which leads to the ability for the luma signal to produce colors when specific patterns are used. This is known as artifacting and can be used to deliberately encode colors without using the color hardware in the computer, particularly in hires modes that do not have the ability to directly produce colors from the playfield. The resulting colors depend strongly on the specific model of computer hardware.

Artifacting only occurs with a composite video or RF connection. With separate Y/C (S-Video) outputs, the luma and chroma signals are never combined and there is no artifacting.

## NTSC composite signal encoding

The chroma signal for NTSC is encoded using quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) at the color subcarrier frequency, 3.579545MHz. This results in a sine wave where the phase of the sine wave determines the hue and the amplitude determines the saturation. Lack of this signal therefore produces no color. In order to decode this signal, the receiver must have a phase reference, which is provided by a color burst of defined phase and color in horizontal blank.

Besides hue/saturation, there is another interpretation of the color signal, which the sum of two separate I and Q signals. I is the in-phase signal, while Q is the quadrature signal. Both are encoded as sine and cosine waves 90 degrees apart in phase, and the sum of the two is the color signal. The two representations are equivalent; I-Q is the Cartesian (X-Y) representation, while hue/saturation is the polar (phase/magnitude) representation.

## Luma/chroma crosstalk

In order to recover the luma and chroma from the composite signal, the decoder must separate the two signals. This is done imperfectly and the result is crosstalk between the two signals. When part of the original luma signal is decoded as chroma, artifacted color results.

Some of this results from imperfect separation circuitry in the decoder, but there are situations where it is theoretically impossible to separate the two. The primary issue is if the luma signal has a component at the color subcarrier frequency, since signal theory says that such a signal can be decomposed into the sum of a sine wave at that frequency and higher frequency harmonics. This makes it impossible to distinguish the fundamental sine wave in the luma signal from the chroma subcarrier. Avoiding this conflict requires the encoder to exclude chroma-like signals from the luma signal before mixing the two. The computer does not do this, which allows for false colors.

The literature for standard NTSC has references to this effect being avoided due to the luma and chroma sequences interleaving in frequency space as offset combs. This is due to the line and fields rates being an odd number of color cycles, which causes the color subcarrier to invert phase on adjacent lines and fields. In old TVs where the color subcarrier is visible, this shows as a fine checkerboard slowly moving up. A comb filter can then take advantage of this by combining adjacent lines or fields to cancel the color subcarrier. Unfortunately, the computer's output deviates from this and generates a signal that is a whole number of color cycles per line and frame. The effect is that the color subcarrier doesn't invert phase between adjacent lines or frames, and the frequency combs of the luma and chroma signals overlap instead of interleaving.

## Artifacted color hues

In order to produce stable artifacted colors, the phase relationship between luma and chroma must be known. The NTSC GTIA produces pixels using a pixel clock (dot clock) that is a multiple of the chroma subcarrier, thus producing stable hues. The highest resolution lores modes use a pixel clock at the chroma subcarrier frequency f sc = 3.58MHz, too low to produce artifacted colors. The hires modes, however, use 2 x f sc = 7.16MHz, which means that alternating pixel patterns produce a signal at the chroma subcarrier rate. Two hues are thus available for even and odd patterns.

The colors produced by the even and odd pattern vary, however. The colors produced by the two patterns will always have the same saturation and opposite hues, by virtue of being signal inverses of each other, and the average of the signal means that the brightness will be halfway (approx. luma 7). The hues, however, depend on the relative phase offset between the luma signal and the color burst produced by GTIA in horizontal blank. This varies for different computer models due to differences in the video output circuitry resulting in different delays between luma and chroma. The most common combinations produced are blue/green on 800s, purple/green on XLs, and red/blue on XEs. The GTIA color adjustment does not affect artifacted hues, however, since it doesn't affect color 1, which doubles as the color burst.

Note that while the hues for even and odd patterns are opposite in the signal, they are not necessarily exactly

opposite when displayed. A major reason for this is that artifacted colors are often so highly saturated that they fall outside of the displayable color range (gamut) of the display, causing the hues to shift when the color values are clamped to range. For instance, it is impossible for a display to produce negative color. This can particularly lead to noticeable differences in the displayed artifacted color between a computer monitor and a TV. The brighter display of the TV can provide more headroom in RGB space than the monitor for the same signal, causing the monitor to clamp more than the TV. The result is the TV showing blue/green artifacting, while the monitor clamps those colors to purple/green.

## Brightness and saturation of artifacted colors

How saturated artifacted colors depends on the relative strength of the 3.58MHz waveform in the luma signal relative to the color burst. For the luma signal, this depends on the difference in brightness between the even and odd pixels. For instance, alternating luma 0 and 4 gives about the same saturation as 10 and 14. 31

The other factor is the strength of the color burst, which varies between computer models. A strong color burst gives weaker artifacting, while a weak color burst gives stronger artifacting. Out of three sampled NTSC computers, an 800 had the weakest color signal with color burst peak-to-peak of about 4 luma units, an 800XL about 8, and a 130XE about 14. Correspondingly, the 800 showed the most saturated artifacting colors.

The brightness of artifacted colors is more straightforward, as it is simply the average of the luma pixels - the result after the f sc component has been separated out.

## Mixing artifacted and non-artifacted colors

When conventionally generated colors are mixed with artifacted colors, the result is the additive blend of the two, since the luma and chroma signals are added together, causing their color signal components to also add. This addition occurs in the I-Q space that the chroma is encoded in. Since YIQ is related to YUV and RGB by linear transforms, this is also equivalently an addition in those color spaces.

## PAL artifacting

It is also possible to produce artifacted colors in the PAL system, though the technique and interpretation is more complex. One of the main differences is the color subcarrier is at a higher frequency, 4.43MHz instead of 3.58MHz. This is a factor of 5/4 faster than the NTSC subcarrier and results in the subcarrier no longer matching the dot clock. Instead, 5 color cycles align with 4 lores pixels, giving a larger repeating pattern than the simple even/odd patterns with NTSC.

## PAL alternation

The phase reversal of PAL on alternating scanlines also affects the colors produced through artifacting, since it also requires the pattern to be reversed on successive scanlines to produce a consistent hue. This produces a herringbone or interrupted checkerboard pattern. This pattern can be placed at four different offsets for four different hues.

Two additional hues are possible by deliberately not reversing the phase direction of the pattern and instead using vertical stripes as with NTSC. This causes the pattern to have opposite V axis values on adjacent scanlines, which are then cancelled by the receiver. The result is blue and yellow, the two colors on the U axis.

