## 6.5 Player/missile graphics

GTIA supports display of eight sprites on top of the playfield. These sprites can have distinct colors and can be moved horizontally much more quickly than the playfield for fast action. Four of the sprites are 8-bit wide players and four are two-bit wide missiles. All sprites are the height of the screen and can be as tall as desired. It is also possible to reposition sprites horizontally in the middle of the screen in order to increase the number of visible objects on screen.

## Player/missile colors

Four color registers are reserved for player/missile graphics, COLPM0-3. Each player shares its color with the missile of the same number.

## Player/missile graphics DMA

The default method for GTIA to receive player/missile graphics data is for ANTIC DMA to read it on a scan line basis, thus relieving the CPU of the burden of spoon-feeding graphics data. In order for this to happen, either bits 2 or 3 of DMACTL in ANTIC must be set to enable DMA, and the corresponding bits 0 and 1 of GRACTL must be set in GTIA to receive data. The graphics data registers GRAFP0-P3 and GRAFM are then accordingly loaded automatically at the beginning of each scan line.

If player or missile DMA is only set in GRACTL and not in DMACTL, then two odd effects can occur. First, if only missile DMA is enabled on ANTIC, but player DMA is enabled in GTIA, then the players will be loaded with whatever bytes are active on the bus while the CPU is executing during cycles 2-5 of the scan line. Second, if P/M DMA is entirely disabled on ANTIC, it is possible for GTIA to mistake a display list fetch for the missile fetch, because the first halted cycle within horizontal blank is considered to be the missile fetch. This causes GTIA to read the display list instruction as missile data and to load players at cycles 3-7 instead of 2-5.

When P/M graphics DMA is stopped on the GTIA side, the graphics data registers retain the last value loaded into them. This results in full-height stripes on screen unless the objects are subsequently repositioned or have their data registers cleared.

## Graphic data registers

The CPU can also load directly into the graphics data registers for players and missiles by writing to GRAFP0-3 and GRAFM directly. This allows the CPU to directly control P/M graphics data when ANTIC DMA is inconvenient. It also allows vertical bar patterns to be displayed without requiring data in memory, since the graphics latches can be loaded once and GTIA will reuse the same pattern for each scan line.

## Vertical delay

Vertical delay is used to move a two-line resolution sprite with scan line resolution. Unlike the Atari 2600's TIA, the GTIA does not have a true vertical delay function with a delayed graphics latch. Instead, the 'vertical delay' function works by masking DMA fetches. Setting the bit for a sprite in the VDELAY register causes GTIA to load DMA data for that sprite only on odd scan lines. In two-line resolution mode, when ANTIC repeats the same data on pairs of scan lines, this effectively moves the sprite image down by one scan line. In one-line resolution mode, this effectively reduces the sprite to two-line resolution.

VDELAY has no effect on writes from the CPU to GRAFP0-3 or GRAFM.

## Player/missile positioning

The eight P/M objects are positioned along their left side via registers HPOSP0-HPOSP3 [$D000-$D003] and HPOSM0-HPOSM3 [$D004-$D007]. Position registers have color clock resolution. A player or missile begins shifting its output to the video display when the horizontal position counter matches the position register; this happens even if the object is positioned in the horizontal blank region (pos < $22), as long as part of it is in the visible region.

The center of the playfield is at the pixel boundary between $7F and $80. This means that the narrow playfield spans $40-$BF, the normal playfield $30-$CF, and the wide playfield $2C-$DD (visible portion of $20-$DF).

## Size control

Each of the players and missiles can be set to one of three widths, with each bit displaying as one color clock (single width), two color clocks (double width), or four color clocks (quadruple width). Player widths are set by SIZEP0-SIZEP3; missile widths are set by SIZEM. Objects are always positioned from their left edge, so increasing an object's width causes it to expand to the right.

## Shift triggering and timing

An object's image is produced by a shift register that gradually shifts out bits to the left. The timing of this shifter is controlled by a horizontal position comparator and a state machine controlled by the size setting.

A player or missile's shift register is loaded and begins shifting when the horizontal position of the object matches the horizontal position counter. This is checked every color cycle, so changing the position in the middle of the scan line can result in missing or duplicated object images. Moving it to the left of the current position prevents the object from triggering, and moving it to the right sets it up to trigger at the new position. Repeatedly moving the object to the right will cause it to appear multiple times. Because only the trigger point at the left side of the object matters, changing the position in the middle of the object's image has no effect and the object will continue to shift out at the same position.

The player/missile shift registers are constantly running, even across horizontal and vertical blank. This means that unlike with the 2600's TIA, positioning a player partially off-screen horizontally will show a partial object within the display region and not wrap the image within it. It is possible, however, for overlap and lockup effects to be carried over from vertical blank into the display of the next frame.

## Overlapping object images

When the horizontal comparator matches, the shift register is reloaded with the contents of the graphics data register. This is done by ORing the latch data into the shift register. Ordinarily the shift register will have long emptied and therefore the shift register contents afterward will be that of the data register. However, if the image has not yet completely shifted out, some of the old bits from the previous image will still be in the register and combined with the new image.

## Shift state machine

The timing of the shift register is controlled by a two-bit state machine whose operation is directed by the object's size setting. This state machine effectively counts off the color clocks for each bit in the sprite image, starting at %00 and going up to %11 for a quadruple width register. A shift register occurs each time the state machine transitions to the %00 state, which is forced whenever the shift register is reloaded. The operation of this state machine can be expressed simply:

`state' = (state + 1) AND size`

Thus, for normal width (%00) the shifter stays in %00 state and shifts out at a rate of one color clock per bit, whereas with quadruple width (%11) the shifter counts from %00 to %11 and shifts out at four color clocks per bit.

Table 15: Results of various size changes in the middle of a player image

<!-- image -->

| Original size   | New size   |   Pixels before size change |   Pixels before size change |   Pixels before size change |   Pixels before size change |   Pixels after size change |   Pixels after size change |   Pixels after size change |   Pixels after size change |
|-----------------|------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| 1x              | 2x         |                          00 |                          00 |                          00 |                          00 |                         01 |                         00 |                         01 |                         00 |
| 1x              | 4x         |                          00 |                          00 |                          00 |                          00 |                         01 |                         10 |                         11 |                         00 |
| 2x              | 1x         |                          01 |                          00 |                          01 |                          00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |
| 2x              | 1x         |                          00 |                          01 |                          00 |                          01 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |
| 2x              | 4x         |                          01 |                          00 |                          01 |                          00 |                         01 |                         10 |                         11 |                         00 |
| 2x              | 4x         |                          00 |                          01 |                          00 |                          01 |                         10 |                         11 |                         00 |                         01 |
| 4x              | 1x         |                          01 |                          10 |                          11 |                          00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |
| 4x              | 1x         |                          10 |                          11 |                          00 |                          01 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |
| 4x              | 1x         |                          11 |                          00 |                          01 |                          10 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |
| 4x              | 1x         |                          00 |                          01 |                          10 |                          11 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |
| 4x              | 2x         |                          01 |                          10 |                          11 |                          00 |                         01 |                         00 |                         01 |                         00 |
| 4x              | 2x         |                          10 |                          11 |                          00 |                          01 |                         00 |                         01 |                         00 |                         01 |
| 4x              | 2x         |                          11 |                          00 |                          01 |                          10 |                         01 |                         00 |                         01 |                         00 |
| 4x              | 2x         |                          00 |                          01 |                          10 |                          11 |                         00 |                         01 |                         00 |                         01 |
| 2x              | 1x*        |                          01 |                          00 |                          01 |                          10 |                         10 |                         10 |                         10 |                         10 |
| 2x              | 1x*        |                          00 |                          01 |                          00 |                          00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |
| 4x              | 1x*        |                          01 |                          10 |                          11 |                          00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |
| 4x              | 1x*        |                          10 |                          11 |                          00 |                          01 |                         10 |                         10 |                         10 |                         10 |
| 4x              | 1x*        |                          11 |                          00 |                          01 |                          10 |                         10 |                         10 |                         10 |                         10 |
| 4x              | 1x*        |                          00 |                          01 |                          10 |                          11 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |                         00 |

## Mid-image size changes

Changing the size of an object causes its shift register to immediately begin shifting with the new width, but using the existing shift state. For the most part, this causes the shift register to finish shifting out its current pixel at the new width, but this leads to some strange patterns when switching to and from double width. Table 15 shows the effects of various size changes.

## Shift register lockup anomaly

The size code %10 produces a normal width sprite similarly to the %00 code. However, the state machine acts slightly differently than the %00 mode in that it has a lockup state not present with %00. Specifically, switching an object to the %10 mode when it is in double or quadruple width and in the %01 or %10 state results in the shift register getting stuck in the %10 state and continuously outputting the same bit. These cases are shown in red in Table 15. This condition persists as long as the size is not changed again and the object is not retriggered, even across horizontal and vertical blank into the next frame. Typically this does not cause problems unless the size is changed in the middle of an image, as otherwise the shift register will have emptied out anyway.
