## 6.6 Collision detection

GTIA has 60 collision bits to indicate when players, missiles, and the playfield collide. This permits fast collision detection at pixel-exact level without the need for the CPU to do expensive bounding box or image comparison checks.

## Collision detection mechanism

A collision is flagged between two objects when both objects are active at the same time during display. This means that a collision is not detected until the display logic actually processes the collision location on-screen, and the CPU must wait until the end of a frame or at least past the point of object display in order for collisions to be reliably detected.

Color registers do not play a part in collision detection - the collision logic can distinguish between two objects of the same color. This is sometimes used to establish hidden collision objects for gameplay purposes, such as an invisible wall or a trigger. The collision logic can also see collisions between two objects even if a third object is displayed on top. Collisions are reported for all pairs of colliding objects, so if three players overlap, six collisions are reported: P0P1, P0P2, P1P0, P1P2, P2P0, P2P1.

## Playfield collisions

For collision detection purposes, the non-background playfield colors are each separate entities that can register collisions with players and missiles. 32 collision bits in eight registers, P0PF-P3PF and M0PF-M3PF, are devoted to registering P/M collisions against PF0-PF3. No collisions are detected against the background.

In high resolution mode (ANTIC modes 2, 3, and F), the areas corresponding to a 1 bit in the graphics data are considered to be PF2 for collision purposes. Each pair of high-resolution pixels is combined and a collision is detected if either pixel is set where a sprite is present. No collisions are registered against areas with a 0 bit even though those are displayed as non-background color.

No playfield collisions are detected in GTIA modes 9 and 11. In GTIA mode 10, a playfield collision will register whenever pixels using PF0-PF3 codes are present. No P/M collisions are reported for playfield pixels that use P/M color codes in a GTIA mode 10 screen.

## Player/missile collisions

Twelve collision bits report collisions between players. A collision between player X and player Y sets two bits, one for player X in the P y PL register and another for player Y in the P x PL register. A player never registers a collision with itself and the self-collision bit for a player is always 0.

Sixteen collision bits in registers M0PL-M3PL report collisions between players and missiles. Each register indicates collisions between all four players against each missile.

There is no support for collision detection between missiles.

## Horizontal and vertical blank

P/M collisions are only registered during the visible portions of the screen refresh and are ignored during horizontal and vertical blank. This means that only the portions of objects at horizontal positions 34-221 ($22-$DD) and in scan lines 8-247 ($08-$F7) can trigger collisions.

An object that is so far left or right that it is in partially in horizontal blank can still register collisions in the part that is in the visible region.

Note that if ANTIC fails to activate vertical blank due to having hi-res active on scan line 247, GTIA will process P/M graphics and can report collisions in scan lines in the 248-7 range when the playfield is enabled.

## Resetting collision latches

The collision detection bits are latches and will stay set once a collision has been detected. Writing to HITCLR resets all collision latches to zero.

