## 6.8 High resolution modes

At the beginning of horizontal blank, ANTIC signals to the GTIA whether high resolution mode is enabled. This mode is enabled for ANTIC modes 2, 3 and F and specifies whether the low two bits of playfield data for each color clock is to be interpreted as individual bits for high resolution mode. This produces pixels at each half color clock, or 320 pixels across for normal playfield width. However, as much of the logic in GTIA operates at color clock rate, this necessitates some logic bypassing and thus some unusual behavior.

When high resolution mode is active, the priority logic always sees PF2, and that is the color that is used unless that playfield is overlapped by players. The high resolution data bypasses the priority logic and conditionally impresses only the luminance from PF1 onto the output. This takes place regardless of whatever color register is used, so the change in luminance occurs on top of anything, including players, missiles, and the fifth player. The collision logic, however, sees a modified PF2C output that is the OR of the two pixels in each color clock, thus

registering collisions against PF2 as expected.

## Pseudo ANTIC mode E

High resolution mode is forced off whenever any of the GTIA special modes are active, thus preventing the PF1 luminance substitution or PF2C collision from interfering. This leads to a quirk of the GTIA whenever PRIOR[7:6] are set in the middle of a scan line. The high resolution flip-flop can only be set at horizontal blank, but it resets any time PRIOR[7:6] is activated and stays off for the rest of the scan line even if those bits are reset to 00. When this happens, ANTIC continues to encode data in high resolution mode while GTIA starts interpreting it as low-resolution data. Due to the differences in ANx bus encoding, this causes ANTIC mode F to revert to a pseudo mode E, where the bit pairs 00-11 encode PF0-PF3 instead of BAK + PF0-PF2.

