## 6.9 GTIA special modes

Setting the top two bits of PRIOR to something other than %00 enables one of the three special GTIA modes. These three modes have several features in common:

- Each pixel is elongated to occupy two color clocks, giving a resolution across of 80 pixels at normal playfield width.
- The GTIA modes only work properly with the hi-res ANTIC modes 2, 3, and F.
- They allow access to more simultaneous colors per scan line than any other documented modes.

These modes only work with a GTIA chip. On rare older devices with a CTIA, the top two bits of PRIOR are ignored and the graphics modes are displayed as their base ANTIC mode (generally mode F). The difference in playfield collision behavior can be used to detect a CTIA or GTIA.

## Mode 9 (16 luminances in one color) (PRIOR[7:6] = %01)

Setting PRIOR[7:6] = %01 produces a playfield with a single color, but using sixteen luminance values. As this occurs by bypassing the color registers, this is the only mode in which the lowest luminance bit can be set and therefore 256 distinct color values produced instead of the usual 128. The color of the playfield comes from the background color register. The luminance in the COLBK register is normally set to zero as otherwise it is OR'ed with the playfield luminance values, reducing the total number of shades available.

For priority purposes, the mode 9 playfield is essentially background. No playfield collisions register, and P/M graphics always have priority over the playfield. The playfield drops out in the presence of any player, even for priority conflicts that produce black.

Missiles also have priority over the playfield like players, unless fifth player mode is enabled. When the fifth player is enabled, however, it will mix with the playfield. The resulting color value is the bitwise OR of the PF3 register and the luminance of the playfield.

## Mode 11 (16 colors in one luminance) (PRIOR[7:6] = %11)

With PRIOR[7:6] = 11, the playfield is instead a single luminance, but with any of all 16 hues specified by the playfield data. The luminance comes from the background color register, with the exception of pixel value %0000, which is always forced to luminance 0. The hue of COLBK is normally set to 0, or else it will be OR'ed with the color values from the playfield, reducing the total number of colors available.

Mode 11 playfields interact with P/M graphics similarly as with mode 9. When the fifth player overlaps the playfield, the result is as if the background color is replaced with PF3: PF3's luminance and hue OR'd with the playfield's hue, except if the playfield is %0000 in which case the luminance is forced to 0 regardless of PF3's luminance.

## Mode 10 (9 color mode) (PRIOR[7:6] = %10)

The nine color mode, activated by PRIOR[7:6] = %10, is more unusual than the other two special modes. All of the colors come from the color registers, giving more color flexibility, and causing more interaction with the priority and collision logic.

The four bit pixel values activate color registers as follows:

- 0000-0011: P0-P3
- x100-x111: PF0-PF3
- 10xx: Background

For priority purposes, the pixel values which correspond to player colors act as though that player/missile were active and are thus modified by the priority settings in PRIOR[0:3]. They do not, however, activate player collisions. The nine color mode, however, is able to activate playfield collisions via the PF0-PF3 codes.

The nine color mode is delayed by one color clock (one half pixel) and thus appears shifted slightly right relative to all other modes. This includes the right border of narrow and normal width playfields, which is pushed out by one color cycle. The right border is unchanged for wide playfields, which already extend to horizontal blank.

Border regions are rendered with a code of 0000 or player 0 instead of the background. This means that players and missiles 1-3 will generally be hidden in borders except for when multicolor P/M or fifth player mode allows them to overcome player in priority.

This mode has a quirk when driven with a low-resolution ANTIC display mode that does not occur with the 16 color/luminance modes. Ordinarily, the BAK and PF0 signals from ANTIC produce the same result as they both send 00 over the AN0 and AN1 lines. However, in the 9 color mode, the BAK signal mutes the playfield signals for the entire two color clock pixel when sent as the second half. This leads the a 9 color mode anomaly where the four bit combination 1000 in ANTIC mode E results in the background color rather than the PF0 color that the resultant 0100 pixel would normally indicate.

## Horizontally scrolling GTIA modes

GTIA modes can be horizontally scrolled like any other mode, with the extra provision that only even values of HSCROL will work properly. This is because GTIA is unaware of ANTIC's horizontal scroll offset when it groups bit pairs to form 4-bit pixels. Odd values of HSCROL will produce a valid display but mix the low two bits of one pixel with the high two of bits of the next pixel to form new pixels instead of shifting the pixels, the same as if the bitmap data were shifted by two bits. The fat pixels in GTIA modes cannot be horizontally shifted by finer than two color clock precision by normal means. 33

## Mixing GTIA modes with low resolution modes

As previously noted, the GTIA modes only work properly with the high resolution modes 2, 3, and F. The reason for this has to do with the encoding of the data on the AN0-2 bus between ANTIC and GTIA. While the highest bandwidth modes have a raw data rate of two bits per color clock, the ANx bus actually has a bandwidth of three bits per color clock, with ANTIC doing additional encoding of the data based on the display mode. The difference in encoding between low-resolution and high-resolution modes prevents the GTIA modes from fully working when ANTIC is set to a low-resolution mode.

The AN0-2 bus encodings are given in Table 17. 34

[33] It has been reported that certain GTIA chips can shift mode 10 by a color clock when running warm, but this is neither reliable nor program controllable.

[34] [AHS99a] p. 7

Table 17: ANx bus encodings

|   Encoding | Lores                                | Hires                                |
|------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
|        000 | Background                           | Background                           |
|        001 | Vertical sync                        | Vertical sync                        |
|        010 | Horizontal blank and switch to lores | Horizontal blank and switch to lores |
|        011 | Horizontal blank and switch to hires | Horizontal blank and switch to hires |
|        100 | PF0                                  | %00 pixel pair                       |
|        101 | PF1                                  | %01 pixel pair                       |
|        110 | PF2                                  | %10 pixel pair                       |
|        111 | PF3                                  | %11 pixel pair                       |

In low resolution modes, one pixel is sent per color clock, and in high resolution modes, two pixels are sent per color clock. ANTIC signals the lores/hires state of the next scan line during horizontal blank and this then determines GTIA's interpretation of the %100-%111 codes.

Normally, the GTIA modes are used with ANTIC high resolution modes, in which the raw bitmap data is sent on AN0-1 two bits at a time. GTIA groups two pairs of bits at a time to form 4-bit pixels, which are then interpreted according to the GTIA mode. The high order bit AN2 is ignored, so the background encoding is not distinguished from a PF0 or %00 bit pair encoding and the border works differently in GTIA modes.

In low resolution modes, the mapping from pixels to ANx encodings is not straightforward and causes problems with GTIA modes. In particular, most four-color modes map BAK and PF0-PF2 instead of PF0-PF3. This makes the available AN0-1 encodings %00, %00, %01, and %10, with %11 not represented. The result is that attempting to use mode E, for instance, results in only 9 of the 16 pixel values being available with %11xx and %xx11 patterns being unattainable. ANTIC modes 4-7 can send the PF3 encoding, but are relatively inflexible in doing so.

