## 9.1 Basic SIO protocol

## Data bus connection

Two data lines are used on the SIO bus, one for data sent from the computer (DATA OUT) and another for data received by the computer (DATA IN). The two are independent and can both can be used simultaneously for full duplex operation, even with different baud rates for the two directions. Multiple devices can listen simultaneously, but only one can send at any one time.

Each device on the SIO bus is configured as either a host or peripheral. The computer is wired as a host and sends on DATA OUT while receiving on DATA IN; peripherals are reversed and receive on DATA OUT while sending on DATA IN. As a result, peripherals cannot normally talk to other peripherals. One consequence of this is that popular SIO2PC devices, which are used to emulate a disk drive with a PC, cannot be used to control other disk drives because the SIO2PC is wired as a peripheral and a reverse-wired 10502PC device is required instead. A few devices are wired to operate in both modes, including auto-switching SIO2PC/10502PC adapters and the Indus GT disk drive.

On the computer, the serial data input and output lines are connected to the serial port lines on POKEY, and therefore all data transfers require manipulating POKEY's serial port. This also results in a standard data format of one start bit, eight data bits from LSB to MSB, and one stop bit with no parity. The normal communication rate is 19,200 baud, although this varies for device-specific commands.

## SIO control lines

The CB2 control line on the PIA is connected to the command line on the SIO bus and is used to tell peripherals that a command frame is being sent. It is active low, so it is normally high and then dropped low during the command frame. The high-to-low transition tells the device that a command frame is starting; the low-to-high transition signals to the device that the computer is ready to receive the response.

The CA2 control line connects to the motor control line on the SIO bus to activate a cassette tape recorder. It is also active low and enables the cassette motor when lowered.

## SIO interrupt lines

Two control lines on the SIO bus are rarely used but allow peripherals to interrupt the main computer CPU. The Proceed line is connected to the PIA's CA1 input, whereas the Interrupt line is connected to the CB1 input. Enabling these interrupts in the PIA control registers will cause the IRQ handler to be invoked on demand. The 1030 Direct Connect Modem is a peripheral that uses this functionality.

## Command Frame

Because multiple devices can be connected to the SIO bus, a standard command sequence is necessary to address a specific device. This is done by lowering the command line and sending a five byte frame at 19200 baud. The five bytes are:

- Device ID
- Command
- Auxiliary byte 1
- Auxiliary byte 2

- Checksum

Command frames are broadcast to all devices, with the device ID indicating the device being addressed. Each device on the SIO bus that processes command frames is expected to have its own unique device ID, and only respond to command frames addressed to it. Table 29 lists some device IDs used.

Table 29: SIO device IDs

| $31-3F   | Disk drive (D:)                                                 |
|----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| $40      | Generic printer (P:)                                            |
| $41      | 820 40 Column Printer, 850 parallel port (P2:)                  |
| $42      | 1025 80 Coumn Printer (P3:)                                     |
| $45      | 1029 Programmable Printer (P6:) Atari Peripheral Emulator (APE) |
| $46      | AspeQt                                                          |
| $4F      | Type 3/4 poll                                                   |
| $50-53   | 850 serial device (R: / R1:-R4:)                                |
| $58      | 1030 serial device (T:)                                         |
| $5F      | Cassette tape (C:) (virtual OS device)                          |
| $6F      | DOS2DOS (PCLink)                                                |
| $70      | SIO2USB                                                         |
| $71-74   | SDrive                                                          |
| $72      | SIO2SD                                                          |

Device $5F is special as it is a virtual device used by the OS to represent the cassette device, intercepted by the SIO routines and routed to special cassette code. DDEVIC=$5F is what is intercepted, not the final SIO bus device ID of $5F. The actual ID $5F is therefore unused, but unavailable for use by a physical device.

The command byte indicates the command being issued, with command codes specific to each device. The auxiliary bytes provide command parameters.

At the end of the frame is the checksum, which is a simple 8-bit carry wrap-around checksum. It can be computed by initially clearing the 6502 carry bit and then adding each data byte in sequence with ADC, followed by folding the carry bit back in with ADC #0. The command frame is valid if the carry wrap-around checksum of the four command bytes is equal to the checksum byte. 42

Not all devices use command frames. Cassette tape recorders are dumb devices and only use the motor control line, not interpreting any commands on the bus; the 1030 modem uses simple command bytes at 300 baud.

## Note

Although most OSes have no limitation on device ID range, the 65C816 XL OS is unable to access device IDs with the MSB set ($80-FF).

## Command Protocol

In addition to interpreting command frames, a standard intelligent SIO device also follows a specific protocol for command execution. All command and data transfers are normally at 19200 baud with no parity. This proceeds

[42] This is also known as a one's complement sum and there are interesting properties that can be used to accelerate its computation, such as associativity. See [RFC1071] for an extended discussion of optimization opportunities.

as follows 43 :

1. Command frame
- The host lowers the command line to indicate the start of a command.
- A delay of 750µs-1600µs is introduced for the peripheral to notice the command line state.
- The five-byte command frame is sent.
- Another delay of 650µs-950µs is introduced for the peripheral to finish receiving the command. (Note that the minimum bound on this is violated by the OS; peripherals should assume no minimum delay.)
- The command line is raised.
- The peripheral checks the command frame, and ignores it if the command is intended for another peripheral or if a framing or checksum error has occurred.
2. Command acknowledgment
- The peripheral initially checks the command code and command parameters for validity. This may take up to 16ms.
- If the command is valid, it quickly sends back a $41 ('A') byte to acknowledge a valid command. If it is invalid, a $4E ('N') or NAK byte is sent back.
3. Data frame from computer
- If the command requires a data frame to be sent from the computer, it is now sent at this time at 19200 baud between 10-18ms after the ACK byte is received from the device. The length is command dependent. A carry wrap-around checksum byte is included at the end.
- The peripheral has 850µs-16ms to process and validate the data frame.
- If the data frame is received correctly, a $41 ('A') or ACK byte is sent by the peripheral. Otherwise, a $4E ('N') or NAK byte is sent and the command is aborted. No complete/error byte is sent if a NAK is sent.
4. Command execution
- The peripheral now executes the command. The amount of time taken varies and can be significant, anywhere from milliseconds for a status command to several hundred milliseconds for a read sector command and over a minute for formatting a disk.
5. Command result
- A delay of at least 250µs is required after the ACK byte before indicating the command result. Note that this delay is dead time, i.e. from the end of the ACK byte to the beginning of the result byte.
- If the command completed successfully, a $43 ('C') or Complete byte is sent by the peripheral. Otherwise, a $45 ('E') or Error byte is sent.
6. Data frame from peripheral
- For commands that send data back to the computer, the peripheral now sends a data frame. A carry wrap-around checksum is sent at the end. Note that for commands that return data, this frame is sent even if an error status ($45) was returned.
7. End of command
- [43] See [ATAXL] section 9 for the official SIO protocol description.

- The command is now completed and another command may be issued on the bus.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| Parameter                                     | Source of delay   | Timing                         |
|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------|
| Assert command line to start of command frame | Host              | 750µs-1.6ms                    |
| Command frame (5 bytes)                       | Host              | Varies (~2.6ms)                |
| End of command frame to deassert command line | Host              | 650µs-950µs                    |
| Deassert command line to start of ACK/NAK     | Peripheral        | 0-16ms                         |
| ACK/NAK byte                                  | Peripheral        | Varies (~520µs)                |
| End of ACK/NAK to start of write data         | Host              | 1.0-1.8ms                      |
| Write data                                    | Host              | Varies (~68ms for 128b sector) |
| End of write data to start ofACK              | Peripheral        | 850µs-16ms                     |
| ACK byte                                      | Peripheral        | Varies (~520µs)                |
| Execute operation                             | Peripheral        | 250µs to device timeout        |
| Complete/Error byte                           | Peripheral        | Varies (~520µs)                |
| End of C/E byte to read data                  | Peripheral        | Not specified; may be zero.    |
| Read data                                     | Host              | Varies (~68ms for 128b sector) |

## Warning

There is no specified delay between the Complete/Error byte and the beginning of the data frame during a read operation and several disk drives will send the data frame back-to-back with the C/E byte. The receive routine needs to keep the serial port hardware active in receive mode across these two sections of the protocol because the first data byte will likely start shifting in even before the CPU is able to read and acknowledge the C/E byte.

## Command line deassertion

Although devices vary in verifying it, the SIO command line needs to stay asserted until a short time after the end of the last command frame byte. Some devices may reject command frames where the command line is negated (raised) too early. The XF551 disk drive is an example of a device that validates this.

## Command acknowledge (ACK)

When a device receives a command frame that is addressed to it and contains a valid command with a matching checksum, the device acknowledges the command by replying with an ACK code ($41). This tells the computer that the command has been received and to proceed to the next phase of the protocol, instead of retrying the command or erroring out.

The ACK is not sent by the device until the command line deasserts. This allows the computer to hold off the device's reply until it has reconfigured POKEY's serial port from sending to receiving.

The device only has a short time to reply with ACK/NAK after receiving a command frame. The computer only waits for one video frame after sending the command before retrying, with up to another video frame of timing slop allowed based on when the command is sent in the frame. This means that devices must ACK/NAK within 16ms. This is not usually a problem for devices with dedicated controllers, but can be more of an issue for device emulators running on a computer with a heavily buffered serial port (particularly USB serial port adapters).

## Negative acknowledge code (NAK)

A NAK code ($4E) is sent by a device instead of an ACK when a protocol issue has been found after receiving a command or data frame. The following conditions can produce a NAK:

- A command frame has been received with an unsupported command ID.
- A command frame has a supported command ID, but unsupported arguments or timing for the current device state, such as invalid sector number for current disk format.
- A data frame has been received with a bad checksum.

The command execution is ended when the NAK is sent. No data frame is expected or sent and the device is ready to receive another command. Like a command ACK, the NAK is held off until the command line deasserts.

A NAK is never sent for an unsupported device ID, as this would cause devices to interfere with each other on the bus. They are similarly not sent for command frame checksum errors. Devices ignore the invalid command frame in these cases.

NAKs are not generally sent for errors in command execution. The primary reason is that a NAK can only be sent in command or data frame acknowledgment, and thus must be sent within 16ms. There are some cases that are ambiguous, such as Read Sector to a disk drive that has no disk; some disk drives can detect this condition quickly enough to NAK the command frame.

## Data frame

Commands may have a data frame associated with them, either sent by the computer (write) or by the device (read). For a read command, the data frame is sent after the complete or error code. For a write command, the data frame is sent after the command ACK, with another ACK/NAK being sent by the device for the data frame before the completion code.

Note that the data direction of the command is sometimes opposite from the command itself. A Format command sent to a disk drive, for instance, is a 'read' style command that returns a data frame from the device despite writing to the disk.

Whether a data frame is sent or received and the length of the data frame must be known in advance by both the computer and the device based on the command being issued. There is no standard indication in SIO protocol of whether a command uses a data frame, the direction of the data frame, or the length of the data frame. This also means that SIO commands cannot use a variable length data frame without indicating the length somehow, such as specifying it in the AUX bytes of the command frame. Mismatches between the computer and device result in communication errors, such as timeouts if the data frame is shorter than expected, or checksum errors when the data frame is too long.

If the data frame is received successfully, the device ACKs the data frame immediately before proceeding with the operation. The allowed time for this is similarly strict as for ACKing command frames (16ms). However, the COMMAND line cannot be used to hold off the device, so the device is required to delay by a minimum time before ACKing the data frame. A framing or checksum error results in the data frame being NAKed and the command being terminated; no C/E byte is sent.

Devices almost always buffer the entire data frame before processing it, both due to controller timing limitations and no requirement for the computer to send the data frame at maximum speed. This usually means that devices cannot initiate the operation until the entire data frame has been received. Disk drives, for instance, don't start the Write Sector or Write Track command on the FDC until after the entire data frame.

## Complete code

A Complete code ($43) is sent after a command has finished execution successfully. It indicates that the device has finished with the command, and both the SIO bus and the device are free to accept another command. The Complete code is sent after the command ACK for write commands and commands with no data frames, and after the data frame ACK for read commands.

The allowed timeout for a Complete code is longer than ACK/NAK codes since occurs after the device operation and is subject to the operation timeout instead of the ACK timeout. This timeout can either be agreed upon between the computer and device or explicitly specified by the device in the third byte returned by the Status command.

Devices occasionally accidentally send a second ACK byte ($41) instead of a Complete byte ($43). The Indus GT diagnostics code does this, as well as the Run command of the I.S. Plate. This protocol violation is allowed by the stock OS, which interprets $41 as Complete.

## Error code

An Error code ($45) is sent instead of a Complete code ($43) when a command was valid but encountered an error during execution. Examples include a disk drive encountering a read error or a printer out of paper. Because Error is sent as a completion code instead of an acknowledgment code, it is subject to the more lenient operation timeout than the strict ACK timeout. Error is never sent in lieu of an ACK, as the NAK code is used there instead.

For commands that are read commands, the Error byte is still followed by a data frame similarly as if the

command had succeeded. This data frame may or may not have valid data. Format Disk is an example of a command that does return valid data on error, as the returned data frame contains the bad sector list.

## Protocol timeouts

The time limits in the SIO protocol are almost exclusively enforced only by the computer, with retries initiated in software. Devices may but often do not implement communication timeouts on their end due to controller limitations. In particular, devices may wait indefinitely for a start bit while receiving command or data frames due to the tight timing requirements of bit-banging serial reception without a UART. This also suspends device idle processing, such as the motor off timeout for disk drives.

## Interrupting commands

In general, the SIO bus does not support interrupting a command in progress. Once a device has recognized a valid command frame and begun acting upon it, it will likely ignore further commands on the bus until the operation has completed, as most devices do not have the ability to interrupt the controller when a command starts (the Indus GT being an exception). Other devices may still respond to further commands addressed to them, however; this can lead to a situation where two devices try to send data to the computer to the same time, producing garbled data.

## Resynchronization

After a protocol error has occurred, such as a timeout triggering on one end, the computer and devices may end up desynchronized such that the device and computer are not at the same states in the SIO protocol. The two must resynchronize before commands can be issued properly again. There is no one single method for doing this, but several mechanisms are used on both sides to try to recover.

When retrying commands, the OS SIO routines have a short delay before reissuing the command. This gives devices a chance for their receive routines to time out and reset back to the command processing loop. Devices that don't implement a receive timeout like the 810 disk drive, however, may end up missing part of a command and then get stuck part way receiving a command frame. These devices rely on the additional command frames filling up their receive buffer so they can exit the receive loop on an invalid command. They then wait for the command line to deassert and then reassert to align to the next command before processing more command frame bytes.

Desynchronization may also occur in the middle of sending a data frame from the computer to the device. Pressing the Break key on the keyboard can do this, by interrupting the OS SIO routines in the middle of a Write command. Devices that implement a transfer timeout can recover quickly from this, but devices that don't may have to receive tens or hundreds of bytes before they can exit the receive loop with a checksum error. The OS sends a command up to 28 times with 5 bytes sent per command, so generally devices will unblock themselves before all retries are exhausted unless they are expecting a long data frame (e.g. double density sector).

## Status command

The majority of commands are device specific, with even common commands like Read ($52) and Write ($57) varying a lot in behavior between different devices. The Status ($53) command is the sole command supported by the majority of SIO devices with fairly regular behavior.

The Status command is a read style command that retrieves a four byte status frame from the device. There are some common bits in the status frame between devices, but none of the four bytes can be entirely relied upon generically for any device ID.

The first status byte indicates the device status:

- Bit 0 is generally set on a command error, and cleared on a successful command. A bad command frame error can include a command frame framing or checksum error, an unsupported command, or invalid command parameters.
- Bit 1 is generally set on a data frame error, and cleared on a successful command. A bad data frame error usually indicates a checksum, framing, or timeout error when transferring a data frame. It is not usually set for invalid data in a properly received data frame or an operation error.
- Bits 2-7 have no standard definition across device types.

The second status byte has no standard definition and usually includes device-specific status. For disk drives, it contains error codes from the floppy disk controller (FDC), and for some printers, it contains the orientation control byte from the last Write command.

The third status byte is almost always a recommended operation timeout for commands. It is specified in the same units as the DTIMLO variable in the OS, in multiples of 64 frames. For instance, a value of $20 indicates a recommended timeout of 2,048 frames, or 34 seconds in NTSC. This typically applies to the slowest command supported by the device, such as the Write ($57) command for a printer. Disk drives particularly use this timeout for the Format ($21) command, but a much shorter timeout of $0F is used by the OS for non-format operations.

The fourth status byte has no standard definition and is often but not always unused. The source code for the 850 controller firmware implies that it may have been intended for a high timeout byte, which also has space reserved for it in DTIMLO+1 but is not implemented in the OS SIO routines.

Sending the Status command can have side effects other than just returning device status. Printers often reset configuration parameters when receiving a Status command, and the Happy 1050 flushes modified sectors in its write buffer back to disk.

