## 9.10 850 Interface Module

The 850 Interface Module connects four serial ports and a parallel port to the computer.

## Firmware versions

There are at least two known versions of the 850 firmware, which is 4K in size. An early revision has a CRC32 of [9201359A], while the common later revision has CRC32 [2CF990B9].

Known differences between the revisions:

- The R: handler in the early revision disables concurrent mode I/O when the Break key is pressed. The newer version instead suppresses the Break key. Note that both behaviors happen even with OS-A, which doesn't have a dedicated Break key vector.
- The early revision only responds to the device ID for P:/P1:. The later revision also responds to P2:.
- The timeout for printer operations was raised from $05 (320 vblanks) to $1F (1984 vblanks).

## Note

There are multiple versions of the 850 documentation. The 1980 version of the Atari 850 Interface Module Operator's Manual documents the early firmware behavior of turning off concurrent I/O when Break is pressed. The 1982 version is split into separate Operator and Technical manuals, and the 1982 Technical manual notes the newer behavior of suppressing Break with a note about the older firmware.

## Serial port functionality

Four 9-pin RS-232 compatible serial ports are exposed on the 850. They can either all be used together at low speed up to 300 baud, or a single port can be used at high speed up to 9600 baud.

The serial ports are asymmetric in hardware capabilities. All four ports support bidirectional full duplex communication and the DTR signal, but only ports 1-3 support DSR, only ports 1 and 4 support RTS, and only port 1 supports CTS. Port 4 does not sensing or controlling any handshaking signals, with RTS and DTR connected but hardwired high.

## RS-232 SIO addressing

The RS-232 ports are addressed using the SIO addresses $50-53.

## RS-232 Status command

The status command ($53 = 'S') returns error and control state information from the 850 controller; AUX1 and AUX2 are ignored. Two bytes are returned, the first of which contains error state and the second of which contains control line state:

First status byte:

<!-- image -->

```
D7 Framing error detected D3 Invalid option D2 Not ready (monitored control line inactive) D1 Bad SIO data frame D0 Invalid command 0 No error detected 1 Error detected
```

Second status byte:

<!-- image -->

```
D7:D6 DSR state D5:D4 CTS state D3:D2 CRX state 00 Always low since last check 01 Currently low, but was high at some point since last check 10 Currently high, but was low at some point since last check 11 Always high since last check
```

D0

RCV state

0

Space

1 Mark

## RS-232 Write command

The write command ($57 = 'W') is used to send data to the 850 controller for transmission. The AUX1 byte of the command frame specifies the number of bytes in the data payload from 0 to 64 bytes, while AUX2 is ignored. If AUX1 is zero, the data payload portion of the SIO sequence is skipped.

Regardless of the value in AUX1, the data frame is always padded to 64 bytes.

The 850 controller does not issue a (C)omplete response until the entire block has been sent.

## RS-232 Control command

The control command ($41 = 'A') corresponds to the R: handler's XIO 34 and is used to modify the outgoing control lines.

## AUX1:

<!-- image -->

```
D7 Enable DTR (Data Terminal Ready) change D5 Enable RTS (Request To Send) change D1 Enable XMT (Transmit) change 0 No change 1 Change state D6 New DTR state (if D7 set) D4 New RTS state (if D5 set) D0 New XMT state (if D1 set) 0 Negate / space 1 Assert / mark
```

## RS-232 Stream command

Sending the command $58 ('X') switches the 850 controller into streaming mode, which corresponds to concurrent mode on the R: handler. AUX1 specifies the I/O direction, while AUX2 is ignored:

## AUX1:

<!-- image -->

D1 Read enable

0 Read from 850 direction disabled

1 Read from 850 direction enabled

D0 Write enable

0

Write to 850 direction disabled

1 Write to 850 direction enabled

If the current word size for the channel is anything other than 8-bit, the I/O direction must be input only and the

baud rate must be 300 baud or less, or the command will fail.

The returned data payload for the stream command consists of nine bytes to be written to $D200-D208 (AUDF1AUDCTL) to configure POKEY for the correct baud rate during the transfer. Afterward, the controller starts operating in streaming mode.

Streaming mode causes the controller to reflect between the Atari SIO bus and the serial port. During streaming, no commands can be sent to the controller, and in particular, it is not possible to read the control line status. The controller exits streaming mode the next time that the command line is asserted.

At higher speeds, the maximum baud rate is limited by the resolution at which the controller firmware can mirror signals between the port and the SIO bus. The firmware updates outputs about every 28μs on average, giving a mediocre resolution of ~3.7 samples per bit at the top speed of 9600 baud.

## RS-232 Configure command

The configure command ($42 = 'B') corresponds to the R: handler's XIO 36. It sets the baud rate, word size, stop bits, and control signal monitoring.

AUX1:

<!-- image -->

- [57] This is extended by some R: compatible serial port devices to 19200 baud, but the 850 treats %1111 as a second 9600 baud code.

| D2   | Watch DSR (Data Set Ready) line                                               |
|------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| D1   | Watch CTS (Clear To Send) line                                                |
| D0   | Watch CRX (Carrier Ready) line                                                |
|      | 0 Ignore control line                                                         |
| 1    | Block attempts to write block or start streaming when control line is negated |

## Automatic handler load

The 850 contains an R: handler in ROM that is downloadable to the computer, allowing the 850 to be used without having to load a handler from disk or include it in a cartridge. This handler can be loaded in three ways:

- Fake disk boot, if no disk drive is attached and powered on as D1:.
- Loaded by the default AUTORUN.SYS that comes with DOS 2.0S, after DOS boots.
- Loaded by a program that knows how to use the 850-specific bootstrap commands.

Upon bootstrap, the R: handler registers itself in HATABS and becomes available though the OS CIO facility, including the BASIC OPEN command. The R: handler itself is relocatable and is loaded at the base of application memory at MEMLO, raising MEMLO up to after the handler. Thus, the R: handler can either load after DOS, or as low as $0700 if DOS is not loaded.

For early ROM revisions, the R: handler raises MEMLO by 1762 ($06E2) bytes, and for the common ROM revision, 1728 ($06C0) bytes. For DOS 2.0S in default configuration, the higher MEMLO requires programs to position themselves higher to around $2400 instead of the default $2000 as used by many programs.

Because the R: handler can relocate itself to any arbitrary byte address, its performance can vary slightly depending on the low address byte where it is loaded. This happens because different load addresses can change which branches and indexing operations in the handler code cross a page, causing them to take slightly longer.

## Type 1/2 Poll command

Command $3F polls the SIO bus for devices with automatically loadable handlers. The 850 responds to this command in one of two ways. For the standard poll with AUX1=$00, it responds once to the very last (26 th ) attempt. It always responds to AUX1=$01. The result of the command is a 12-byte DCB to use with the SIOV vector to retrieve the booter/relocator, which is then invoked at $0506. 58 This program then loads, relocates, and initializes the handler at MEMLO, after which MEMLO is raised to above the handler.

## Booter/relocator download command

Command $21 (!) loads the booter/relocator from the device directly with using a poll command. The booter/relocator is returned in a single block, so the size must be known beforehand. This command is usually not issued directly, but according to the DCB returned by the poll command. AUX1/2 are ignored.

Early ROM revisions return 345 ($0159) bytes from this command, while the common revision returns 342 ($0156) bytes. This means that $0500-0658 must be available to bootstrap the 850.

## Handler download command

Command $26 (&amp;) is used to load the peripheral handler from the device; AUX1/2 are ignored. Unlike the similar command used by Type 3/4 Polls, the 850 does not return the handler in blocks. Instead, it is returned as a single large block. This means that the handler size must be known beforehand. This command is usually not

[58] As noted earlier, DOS II's AUTORUN.SYS hardcodes $0506 as the start address, so this can be relied upon.

issued directly, but automatically by the booter/relocator.

Early ROM revisions return 1460 ($05B4) bytes from this command. The common revision returns 1496 ($0592) bytes.

## Diskless bootstrap

To support using the 850 without DOS, such as with a telecommunications cartridge, the 850 supports a fake disk boot (type 0 poll) to load the R: handler into memory. The 850 simulates a disk drive on D1: and returns three boot sectors with a load address of $0500. The boot sectors contain the same relocator bootstrap code as returned by command $21, except for some additional unused data being returned at the end of the third sector. The extra data is from after where the relocator is stored in the 850 firmware ROM, containing the first part of the handler download.

A couple of safeguards are in place to avoid interfering with a real disk drive. The fake disk boot process is initiated by the Get Sector command sent by the OS boot process, but the 850 waits until 26 consecutive Get Sector commands have been sent to D1: before responding to the 27 th command with $08 00 01 00 09. This also unlocks the Read Sector command for sectors 1-3. Those sectors can be read in any order, but any other command to D1: -- including another Get Sector command or Read Sector for any sector other 1-3 permanently disables the fake boot process until the 850 is reset. The relocator/handler download commands, however, are not disabled.

## Reset behavior

Like most SIO devices, the 850 is not reset when the computer is reset, as it is unaware of when that occurs. However, it does monitor the SIO Ready signal line and resets itself if the computer is turned off.

## Printer support

The 850 also supports a parallel printer port, using the standard printer SIO protocol. The printer commands are only responded to if a printer is connected and not in fault status.

The original firmware only supports device ID $40 (P:/P1:). The newer firmware also supports $41 (P2:).

## Printer status command

A printer status command ($53) responds with a four-byte status frame as follows:

| Byte 1                             | D7=1: Always set                                                     |
|------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                    | D2=1: Printer timeout                                                |
|                                    | D1=1: Bad data frame bit (framing or checksum error)                 |
|                                    | D0=1: Bad command frame bit (unsupported command or bad orientation) |
| Byte 2                             | AUX1 of last valid printer command (status or write)                 |
| Byte 3                             | Timeout low ($05 or $1E)                                             |
| Byte 4                             | Timeout high ($00)                                                   |
| Table 37: 850 printer status frame | Table 37: 850 printer status frame                                   |

The timeout value is lower for older firmware than for newer firmware ($05 vs. $1E).

## Printer write command

The printer write ($57) command sends one or more characters to the printer. As with the 820, AUX1 of the write command determines the orientation and length of the data frame. The 850 only supports normal orientation

($4E) with a 40 byte frame; any other orientation is NAKed.

The data frame is processed up to an including any EOL ($9B); characters after the first EOL are ignored. An EOL, if present, is transformed to a CR ($0D) before being sent. Additionally, whenever two EOLs are sent in a row, a space is written in between to ensure that the printer prints a blank line.

Printing is synchronous. There is no buffering and the write command will block until all characters are written or a timeout occurs. The 850 itself implements a 5 or 30 second timeout for the entire write, depending on the firmware revision. If a timeout occurs, the remainder of the write is discarded, the printer timeout error bit is set, and Error is returned.

A successful printer write will clear all printer error status bits.

The 850 allows printer writes to be interrupted by another command. Asserting the SIO command line while a printer write operation is in progress causes the 850 to terminate the write operation and prepare to receive a new command frame.

