## 9.11 835 Modem

The Atari 835 modem is an SIO bus peripheral that allows phone line based communications at 300 baud with Bell 103 modem compatible modulation. It was shipped with the Telelink II communications software cartridge.

## Command protocol

The 835 does not use the standard SIO protocol and communicates exclusively at 300 baud. Commands are distinguished by the SIO command line being asserted while command bytes are sent, also at 300 baud. The motor control line is not used, so the 835 is always active. In particular, this means that the 835's command bytes and standard SIO command frames are constantly being received by both the 835 and other devices, with framing and checksum errors preventing the devices from misinterpreting the data.

## Modem processing

Data transmission starts suspended and must be explicitly resumed before communications can take place. When resumed, the 835 transfers data between the SIO bus and the modem.

The 835 continuously runs four shift registers in software: SIO input, SIO output, modem input, and modem output. Shift processing occurs at 1200Hz with all four shifters running at 300 baud, so the 835 can sample with quarter bit phase precision. The firmware receives and retransmits bytes between the SIO and modem ports, so bits are 'reconditioned' in the process and are retimed at 300 baud regardless of the original transmission rate. This also allows for one byte of buffering in each shift register, though the 835 has no ability to catch up since all shifters run at 300 baud and there is no provision for flow control.

The modem processing loop also monitors the SIO ready and carrier detect states. If SIO ready drops, indicating that the computer is turned off, the 835 will automatically reset itself. Changes in carrier detect state are monitored to handle the various dial / answer processes.

| Code      | Command            | Description                                                  |
|-----------|--------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| $48 ('H') | Send break signal  |                                                              |
| $49 ('I') | Set originate mode | Switches to the originating modem set band (1270Hz/1070Hz).  |
| $4A ('J') | Set answer mode    | Switches to the answering modem set band (2225Hz/2025Hz).    |
| $4B ('K') | Begin pulse dial   | Take phone off hook and pulse dial subsequently sent digits. |

Table 38: 835 Modem hardware commands

| Code      | Command                    | Description                                                   |
|-----------|----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| $4C ('L') | Pick up phone (off hook)   |                                                               |
| $4D ('M') | Hang up phone (on hook)    |                                                               |
| $51 ('Q') | Reset modem                | Return to power-up state and re-enter SIO command processing. |
| $52 ('R') | Enable sound               | Enable phone sound through TV speaker                         |
| $53 ('S') | Disable sound              | Disable phone sound through TV speaker                        |
| $57 ('W') | Set analog loopback test   | Turns on analog echo so that transmitted data is received.    |
| $58 ('X') | Clear analog loopback test | Turns off analog echo.                                        |
| $59 ('Y') | Resume modem               | Stops transmission of received data across SIO bus.           |
| $5A ('Z') | Suspend modem              | Resumes transmission of received data across SIO bus.         |

Commands $4E-$50 ('N' through 'P') and $54-56 ('T' through 'V') are ignored and not handled by the firmware. Some of them are commands only supported by the 1030 or XM301, or have different definitions in the T: handler software.

If the modem is suspended and thus processing SIO commands, only the Reset Modem ('Q') and Resume Modem ('Y') commands are handled. All other commands are ignored.

The SIO command line should be asserted before the start of the byte and deasserted after the end of the byte. In particular, the two processing modes have different quirks in this regard. The modem processing loop simply requires SIO command to be asserted when the stop bit is processed.

## Command validation bug

Command bytes in the range of $80-FF are ignored by the firmware, but bytes within $00-7F and outside of the range $48-5A (H-Z) can cause the 835 to malfunction. This is due to missing validation in the firmware, resulting in it overrunning the bounds of a jump table and jumping to random locations within the code page that handles commands. This only applies when normal command processing is enabled and not specialized command processing, like the pulse dialing loop.

## Signaling

The 1030 modem is one of the rare devices that uses the SIO proceed and interrupt control lines. The proceed line is used to signal that communication can proceed, while the interrupt line indicates the carrier detect state. These are intended to drive the PIA interrupt facility in order to assert IRQs on the 6502.

Both signals are momentarily pulled low for one tick at the modem processing rate of 1200Hz, lasting for 833μs. The SIO proceed signal pulses when a command finishes, and the SIO interrupt signal pulses on a change in the carrier detect state.

## Command behavior

## $48 (H) - Send break signal

Sends a long space (0 bit) signal to the remote side, often interpreted as a request to interrupt an operation. The controller waits for any currently buffered bytes to finish shifting, then suspends the shifters and pulls the modem transmit line low. After half a second, the transmit line is raised, the shifters are re-enabled, and regular

communication resumes. SIO proceed is pulsed both after the command and when the break is finished.

As the SIO input shifter is also suspended during this process, no commands can be issued until the break completes.

## $49/$4A (I/J) - Set originate/answer mode

These commands select the tone set used by the modem, choosing the 'polarity' of the communication. One side must use the originating tone pair while the other side must use the answering tone pair, or the connection will not work.

Conventionally, the calling device uses originating tones while the answering device uses answering tones. This is not required, however, and crucially the 835 does not attempt to enforce this. This means that attempting to answer a call without sending the J command to switch to answering tones will fail, as the modem will attempt to use originating tones. Similarly, the I command must be used to switch back to originating tones before dialing after answering a call.

## $4B (K) - Pulse dial

The K command switches the 835 to pulse dialing mode, where it momentarily pulses the phone connection onhook to dial a number. Timing is automatically handled by the 835 such that the computer need only supply the digits; the firmware automatically controls the pulse and interdigit timing and tells the computer when each new digit can be supplied.

The controller issues a proceed pulse to the computer to indicate when it is ready for a digit, including before the first digit and after each received digit is dialed. Each digit is sent from the computer as command byte from $x1$xA to indicate 1-10 pulses, corresponding to dialing 1-9 or 0. The upper nibble is masked off and ignored, except for a Q byte which will reset the modem. Any byte with a lower nibble of $C-$F or $0 is ignored entirely and will just result in the controller pulsing proceed to request another byte. (Note that this means that an ATASCII '0' will not work.) A lower nibble of $B ends pulse dialing and executes the off-hook ('L') command, which will also pulse the SIO proceed line upon completion.

The pulse dial command implicitly enables phone audio at the start of the dialing process.

## $4C (L) - Pick up phone

The L command takes the phone off-hook, picking up the phone. This also begins the carrier detection process, where the controller will wait up to 30 seconds to detect a carrier. SIO proceed is pulsed immediately after the command is processed, without waiting for the carrier, and SIO interrupt is pulsed when the carrier is detected (or subsequently lost).

The modem processing loop resumes execution during the 30 second wait for carrier and the modem can process commands, particularly the M (hang up phone) command. If 30 seconds pass without a carrier being detected, the modem will automatically hang up.

Unlike the pulse dial command, the pick up command does not enable phone audio.

## $4D (M) - Hang up phone

The M command puts the phone back on-hook, hanging up. The controller waits for any previously received data to finish sending, then hangs up and waits for carrier detect to drop. SIO proceed is not pulsed until this process is complete.

## $51 (Q) - Reset modem

This command resets the modem, hanging up the phone, restoring it to default state. It is similar to power-on initialization except for also pulsing proceed to tell the computer when reinitialization is complete.

The Q command is also notable for being accepted in many contexts where other commands are not. This includes suspended mode and pulse dialing.

## $52/$53 (R/S) - Enable/disable sound

The R and S commands enable and disable sound from the phone line being played through the TV speaker.

Sound is also automatically enabled at the start of dialing, and automatically disabled on modem reset, when a carrier is detected or when hanging up, either manually or due to lost carrier. It is not automatically enabled when manually picking up.

There is no support in the 835 for the opposite direction, playing computer sound on the phone line. This means that the 835 cannot tone dial.

## $57/$58 (W/X) - Set/clear analog loopback test

The W and X commands enable and disable analog loopback, respectively, where the analog output of the modem is looped back to the input. This allows most of the modem short of the phone line to be tested without a connection, with any byte sent being received back. The phone does not need to be taken off-hook to enable analog loopback, and no pick up or hang up occurs when toggling it.

A side effect of enabling analog loopback is that the modem detects a carrier while it is enabled, because it switches to using the same tones for both transmitting and receiving and the carrier detect logic senses the modem's own output.

## $59 (Y) - Resume modem

Re-enables modem processing after suspension with the Z (suspend modem) command.

## $5A (Z) - Suspend modem

Used to temporarily disable the modem so that the SIO bus can be used to connect to other devices.

Modem processing is resumed through the Y (resume modem) command.

