## 9.13 1030 Modem

The 1030 modem is an SIO bus peripheral that allows phone line based communications at 300 baud with Bell 103 modem compatible modulation. It is an improved version of the 835 with tone dialing and bootstrap support. 60

[59] There is an apparent error in Jerzy Sobola's 835 schematic, which has the P2.3 and P2.4 connections swapped between the off-hook relay and audio pass-through signals.

[60] The author would like to acknowledge the help of mr-atari and AtariGeezer in recording and analysis of the 1030 hardware, particularly the bootstrap process, and Vasyl for dumping the 8050 and external ROM chips.

## SIO command processing

The 1030 has two command modes, active and suspended. In suspended mode, SIO commands are processed, while modem processing occurs in active mode. It powers up in and resets to suspended mode whenever the computer is power-cycled, and transitions between the modes in response to commands.

In suspended mode, no modem carrier detection or data reception/transmission occurs as the controller is occupied waiting for and processing SIO commands. Four commands are handled by the firmware:

- Device $31 command $53 - disk status
- Device $31 command $52 - disk read sector
- Device $58 command $3B - download ModemLink
- Device $58 command $3C - download T: handler

The firmware simultaneously monitors for standard SIO command frames at 19200 baud and 1030 command bytes at 300 baud. If it receives a command byte at 300 baud of $51 ('Q') or $59 ('Y'), it will execute the corresponding Reset or Resume Modem command, and in the latter case, transition from SIO command processing to modem processing. The command byte must be the first byte sent after SIO command is asserted so the firmware can switch receive paths after detecting the framing error.

## Fake disk boot

The computer can boot ModemLink firmware directly off of the 1030 by means of a fake disk boot, where the 1030 emulates a D1: disk drive. The fake disk drive will not activate until the 20 th status command sent to D1:, upon which the 1030 will respond with a plain $00 00 E0 00 status frame and then enable processing of its Read Sector command to return a single boot sector. The boot sector checks if the T: handler is present and exits silently if so (C=0); otherwise, it downloads and runs the ModemLink software.

The disk emulation does not respond to any other commands and will not even NAK them. Any valid but unhandled command to D1:, including a Read Sector other than for sector 1, will not be responded to but will reset the polling counter back to 20, disabling the Read Sector command.

## Download commands

The boot sector returned by the 1030 uses SIO address $58, command $3B to download the ModemLink software. This command returns a large $2800 byte data frame to be downloaded to $0C00-33FF, with a call to $1D0C to initialize the T: handler and ModemLink being installed into DOSVEC with a start address of $0C00. AUX1/AUX2 in the command frame are ignored. This command requires a device timeout of just over 6 seconds to complete due to the long payload.

The T: handler embedded within the on-board ModemLink software can also be downloaded by itself using address $58, command $3C. This returns $B30 bytes corresponding to the subset $1D00-282F within the full ModemLink download. The initialization routine is at $1D0C. The T: handler is not relocatable.

Unlike the 850, there are no one-time restrictions on the download commands and the 1030 will respond to them any number of times without requiring a reset process. However, the 1030 must be processing SIO commands for this, and will not be able to respond if it is in modem processing mode.

## Receive tones during download

While sending the ModemLink or T: handler software, different tones can be heard from the computer during the transmission. This is caused by the 1030 sending data blocks from different areas of the firmware at slightly different speeds. The baud rate is the same - 19200.0 baud - but the inter-byte delay varies.

Table 40: 1030 Firmware Load Block Timing

| Content    | Addresses   | ROM Source      |   8048 machine cycles/byte |   Bytes/sec |
|------------|-------------|-----------------|----------------------------|-------------|
| ModemLink  | $0C00-1CFF  | External        |                        155 |      1734.2 |
| T: handler | $1D00-1DEF  | Internal Bank 0 |                        157 |      1712.1 |
| T: handler | $1DF0-256F  | Internal Bank 1 |                        159 |      1690.6 |
| T: handler | $2570-276F  | External        |                        155 |      1734.2 |
| T: handler | $2770-282F  | External        |                        159 |      1690.6 |
| ModemLink  | $2830-336F  | External        |                        155 |      1734.2 |
| ModemLink  | $3370-33FF  | External        |                        159 |      1690.6 |

## Modem processing

When the modem is active, the modem processing loop takes over. SIO commands are not processed and are ignored while this loop is active, but modem monitoring, communication, and 1030 command processing take place simultaneously.

The 1030 continuously runs four shift registers in software: SIO input, SIO output, modem input, and modem output. Shift processing occurs at 1200Hz with all four shifters running at 300 baud, so the 1030 can sample with quarter bit phase precision. The firmware receives and retransmits bytes between the SIO and modem ports, so bits are 'reconditioned' in the process and are retimed at 300 baud regardless of the original transmission rate. This also allows for one byte of buffering in each shift register, though the 1030 has no ability to catch up since all shifters run at 300 baud and there is no provision for flow control.

The modem processing loop also monitors the SIO ready and carrier detect states. If SIO ready drops, indicating that the computer is turned off, the 1030 will automatically reset itself and switch to SIO command processing. Changes in carrier detect state are monitored to handle the various dial / answer processes.

## Data protocol

When the modem connection is active, the computer and the 1030 modem exchange data directly on the bus at 300 baud, without using command or data frames. This means that the SIO bus is exclusively dedicated to the modem during an online connection unless suspended using the $5A ('Z') command. The 1030 does not use the motor control line as the tape drives do.

## Command protocol

Unlike other SIO peripherals, the 1030 uses a non-standard protocol for modem commands on the SIO bus. All commands are sent as single characters at 300 baud with the command line asserted. There is no mechanism to prevent other devices from receiving these bytes; they are simply expected to ignore them as invalid command frames due to framing errors or invalid command frame checksums.

| Code      | Command            | Description                                                 |
|-----------|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| $48 ('H') | Send break signal  |                                                             |
| $49 ('I') | Set originate mode | Switches to the originating modem set band (1270Hz/1070Hz). |
| $4A ('J') | Set answer mode    | Switches to the answering modem set band (2225Hz/2025Hz).   |

Table 41: 1030 Modem hardware commands

| Code      | Command                    | Description                                                   |
|-----------|----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| $4B ('K') | Begin pulse dial           | Take phone off hook and pulse dial subsequently sent digits.  |
| $4C ('L') | Pick up phone (off hook)   | Take phone off hook and begin waiting for carrier.            |
| $4D ('M') | Hang up phone (on hook)    | Hang up by putting phone on hook.                             |
| $4F ('O') | Begin tone dial            | Take phone off hook and connect POKEY audio to phone line.    |
| $50 ('P') | Start 30 second timeout    | Wait up to 30 seconds for carrier.                            |
| $51 ('Q') | Reset modem                | Return to power-up state and re-enter SIO command processing. |
| $57 ('W') | Set analog loopback test   | Turns on analog echo so that transmitted data is received.    |
| $58 ('X') | Clear analog loopback test | Turns off analog echo.                                        |
| $59 ('Y') | Resume modem               | Stops transmission of received data across SIO bus.           |
| $5A ('Z') | Suspend modem              | Resumes transmission of received data across SIO bus.         |

Commands $4E ('N') and $52-56 ('R' through 'V') are ignored and not handled by the firmware. Some of them are commands only supported by the 835 or XM301, or have different definitions in the T: handler software. Compared to the 835, the 1030 adds the tone dialing and 30 second timeout commands, and removes the enable/disable sound commands.

If the modem is suspended and thus processing SIO commands, only the Reset Modem ('Q') and Resume Modem ('Y') commands are handled. All other commands are ignored.

The SIO command line should be asserted before the start of the byte and deasserted after the end of the byte. The two processing modes have different quirks in this regard. The modem processing loop simply requires SIO command to be asserted when the stop bit is processed. The SIO command processing loop requires the 300 baud command byte to be the first byte issued after the SIO command line is asserted.

## Command validation bug

Command bytes in the range of $80-FF are ignored by the firmware, but bytes within $00-7F and outside of the range $48-5A (H-Z) can cause the 1030 to malfunction. This is due to missing validation in the firmware, resulting in it overrunning the bounds of a jump table and jumping to random locations within the code page that handles commands. For example, the command byte $5F will lock up the 1030 firmware's main thread and prevent it from processing commands. This only applies when normal command processing is enabled and not specialized command processing like dial loops or the SIO command loop monitoring for Q/Y commands.

## Signaling

The 1030 modem is one of the rare devices that uses the SIO proceed and interrupt control lines. The proceed line is used to signal that communication can proceed after a command, while the interrupt line indicates the carrier detect state. These are intended to drive the PIA interrupt facility in order to assert IRQs on the 6502.

Both signals are momentarily pulled low for one tick at the modem processing rate of 1200Hz, lasting for 833μs. The SIO proceed signal pulses when a command finishes or when a new byte is needed during a dial command, and the SIO interrupt signal pulses on a change in the carrier detect state.

There is no dedicated reporting for changes in the on/off hook state. The handler software must infer the phone being taken off-hook when dial commands are issued. The 1030 does indicate via the SIO proceed line when a hang-up occurs due to carrier detect timeout.

## Transitioning back to SIO command processing

Once in modem processing state, the 1030 does not monitor or process any SIO commands until it transitions back to the SIO command processing. This happens in one of three cases:

- The Suspend Modem ('Z') command is issued.
- The Reset Modem ('Q') command is issued.
- The computer is turned off (SIO ready deasserts).

Notably, hanging up the modem does not end modem processing. This can pose problems when soft-resetting the computer, as the 1030 will remain in the modem processing loop and fail to respond to disk boot or download commands.

The typical solution is to power-cycle the computer so the 1030 can reset itself when the SIO ready signal drops. However, software that specifically tries to download the T: handler from the 1030 can also send a Reset Modem ('Q') command at 300 baud with SIO command asserted to re-enable SIO command processing.

## Command behavior

## $48 (H) - Send break signal

Sends a long space (0 bit) signal to the remote side, often interpreted as a request to interrupt an operation. The controller waits for any currently buffered bytes to finish shifting, then suspends the shifters and pulls the modem transmit line low. After half a second, the transmit line is raised, the shifters are re-enabled, and regular communication resumes. SIO proceed is pulsed both after the command and when the break is finished.

As the SIO input shifter is also suspended during this process, no commands can be issued until the break completes.

## $49/$4A (I/J) - Set originate/answer mode

These commands select the tone set used by the modem, choosing the 'polarity' of the communication. One side must use the originating tone pair while the other side must use the answering tone pair, or the connection will not work.

Conventionally, the calling device uses originating tones while the answering device uses answering tones. This is not required, however, and crucially the 1030 does not attempt to enforce this. This means that attempting to answer a call without sending the J command to switch to answering tones will fail, as the modem will attempt to use originating tones. Similarly, the I command must be used to switch back to originating tones before dialing after answering a call.

## $4B (K) - Pulse dial

The K command switches the 1030 to pulse dialing mode, where it momentarily pulses the phone connection on-hook to dial a number. Timing is automatically handled by the 1030 such that the computer need only supply the digits; the firmware automatically controls the pulse and interdigit timing and tells the computer when each new digit can be supplied.

The controller issues a proceed pulse to the computer to indicate when it is ready for a digit, including before the first digit and after each received digit is dialed. Each digit is sent from the computer as command byte from $x1$xA to indicate 1-10 pulses, corresponding to dialing 1-9 or 0. The upper nibble is masked off and ignored, except for a Q byte which will reset the modem. Any byte with a lower nibble of $C-$F or $0 is ignored entirely and will just result in the controller pulsing proceed to request another byte. (Note that this means that an

ATASCII '0' will not work.) A lower nibble of $B ends pulse dialing and executes the off-hook ('L') command, which will also pulse the SIO proceed line upon completion.

Pulses are issued by the firmware at a rate of 10 pulses/second with a make/break ratio of about 30%/70%. The time for the controller to signal completion, the computer to send the next byte, and for the controller to start the next digit results in an interdigit delay of about 630ms from the end of the last pulse from the last digit to the first pulse of the next, or 730ms from pulse end to pulse end.

The 1030 does not have a speaker or connection for phone audio, and so the dial tone and dialing sounds are not audible. A small chirp is audible from the 1030 itself from an internal relay whenever the phone is placed back on-hook during pulse dialing or when hanging up.

## $4C (L) - Pick up phone

The L command takes the phone off-hook, picking up the phone. This also begins the carrier detection process, where the controller will wait up to 30 seconds to detect a carrier. SIO proceed is pulsed immediately after the command is processed, without waiting for the carrier, and SIO interrupt is pulsed when the carrier is detected. SIO proceed is not pulsed when the carrier is detected.

The modem processing loop resumes execution during the 30 second wait for carrier and the modem can process commands, particularly the M (hang up phone) command. If 30 seconds pass without a carrier being detected, the modem will automatically hang up and proceed is pulsed to indicate the hang up.

## $4D (M) - Hang up phone

The M command puts the phone back on-hook, hanging up. The controller waits for any previously received data to finish sending, then hangs up and waits for carrier detect to drop. SIO proceed is not pulsed until this process is complete.

The controller does not return to SIO command processing mode when this command is issued - it remains in modem processing mode. The Q (reset modem) command is needed to re-enable SIO commands on the modem.

## $4F (O) - Tone dial

Tone dialing is performed with the O command. Unlike pulse dialing where the controller does most of the work, the 1030 only conducts the computer's audio onto the phone line and the computer must generate the DTMF tones. The standard T: handler does this through 4-bit volume only mode. Unlike pulse dialing, tone dialing is audible as there is no way for the handler to play DTMF tones for the 1030 without also playing them through the regular audio output.

Upon receiving the O command, the controller takes the phone off-hook, waits two seconds, then enables audio pass-through and pulses proceed so the computer can play the DTMF tones. Afterward, the computer then sends a Q command to reset the modem or a P command to end dialing and begin waiting for carrier, with any other command byte or any non-command byte ignored. Either way, the audio pass-through is disabled and tone dialing ends. Proceed is pulsed again after the P/Q command.

An oddity of this setup is that the SIO bus does not actually have an audio output; instead, the 1030 amplifies leakage in the SIO audio in line to detect POKEY's output. This can be unreliable depending on the computer model or presence of other devices on the SIO bus, and the 1030's documentation says that it does not work with the 400.

## $50 (P) - Start 30 second timeout

The P command disables the audio pass-through from tone dialing and takes the phone off-hook to wait for the

carrier, using the same logic as the pick up phone ('L') command. The only effective difference between the P and L commands is that only P is accepted to end tone dialing; otherwise there is no difference as the audio pass-through is already disabled when not tone dialing.

## $51 (Q) - Reset modem

This command resets the modem, hanging up the phone, restoring it to default state, and re-enabling SIO command processing. It is similar to power-on initialization except for also pulsing proceed to tell the computer when reinitialization is complete.

The Q command is also notable for being accepted in many contexts where other commands are not. This includes SIO command or suspended mode and pulse/tone dialing.

## $57/$58 (W/X) - Set/clear analog loopback test

The W and X commands enable and disable analog loopback, respectively, where the analog output of the modem is looped back to the input. This allows most of the modem short of the phone line to be tested without a connection, with any byte sent being received back. The phone does not need to be taken off-hook to enable analog loopback, and no pick up or hang up occurs when toggling it.

A side effect of enabling analog loopback is that the modem detects a carrier while it is enabled, because it switches to using the same tones for both transmitting and receiving and the carrier detect logic senses the modem's own output.

## $59 (Y) - Resume modem

Re-enables modem processing after suspension with the Z (suspend modem) command. The controller reenters the modem processing loop and pulses SIO proceed.

This command can also be used to begin modem processing after the modem powers up or is reset, since the suspended flag is set whenever the modem is processing SIO commands.

## $5A (Z) - Suspend modem

Used to temporarily disable the modem so that the SIO bus can be used to connect to other devices. The controller waits for any currently shifting data to finish, then disables the shifters and pulses SIO proceed, after which it switches to SIO processing mode. If a connection has been established, the phone stays off-hook and the carrier is preserved, but no new data is sent and any received data is lost.

Modem processing is resumed through the Y (resume modem) command.

Carrier detection is also suspended, so the modem will not report loss of carrier over the SIO interrupt line. However, it will reconcile and report a change once modem processing is resumed.

