## 9.15 SX212 Modem

The SX212 modem is a Hayes-compatible 1200 baud modem with both SIO and RS-232 connections. Like the XM301 and unlike the 1030, it has no on-board software and a T: handler or communications program must be loaded externally.

## Command set

The SX212's command interface is handled by a Sierra Semiconductor SC11008 Stand-Alone Modem Interface Controller. The following commands are supported:

Table 43: SX212 supported commands

| A/   | Repeat last command                 |
|------|-------------------------------------|
| ATA  | Answer (go off hook)                |
| ATB  | Set Bell modulation mode*           |
| ATC  | Set transmit carrier                |
| ATD  | Dial                                |
| ATE  | Set echo                            |
| ATF  | Set full duplex                     |
| ATH  | Set on/off hook                     |
| ATI  | Information                         |
| ATL  | Speaker loudness *                  |
| ATM  | Speaker mode                        |
| ATO  | Originate (go off hook)             |
| ATP  | Set pulse dial mode                 |
| ATQ  | Set quiet mode                      |
| ATR  | Set reverse mode                    |
| ATS  | Set or query register               |
| ATT  | Set touch dialing                   |
| ATV  | Set verbose reporting               |
| ATX  | Set connect/busy/dialtone reporting |
| ATY  | Set long space disconnect enable *  |
| ATZ  | Reset modem                         |

Commands marked with an asterisk (*) are ones that are documented in the SC11008 datasheet and supported by the SX212, but not documented in the Atari SX212 Modem Owner's Manual.

## Escape guard

Like truly Hayes-compatible modems, the SX212 requires appropriate guard time before and after the +++ escape sequence to recognize it as such. This is set in register S12 in 1/50 th second units and defaults to one

second. Attempting to use the time-independent escape sequence (TIES) used by some modems without appropriate delays does not work. 61

## Version information

The ATI0 and ATI1 commands emit decimal numbers for the product code and firmware checksum of the modem, respectively. On at least one modem, these values are 134 and 103.

## SIO motor control line

Since the standard SIO command frame protocol is not used by the SX212, the motor control line is used instead to indicate when communication with the modem is desired. Data is only received by and sent from the SX212 when the motor control line is asserted low.

Conflicts on the motor control line are avoided because the SX212, like the 410 and 1010 Program Recorders, only have one SIO connector and are designed to only be used at the end of the SIO chain.

## SIO proceed/interrupt lines

The SX212 indicates the carrier detect and high speed states to the computer through the SIO proceed and interrupt signals, respectively. These match the indicator lights such that the proceed line is low whenever CD is on and the interrupt line is low when HS is on. Changes in these signals are then exposed to software via connections to the CA1 and CB1 inputs on the PIA.

Because the PIA only allows edge detection on the CA1/CB1 inputs, an initialization sequence is necessary for the handler software to ascertain the current state of the SIO proceed and interrupt lines before it can begin tracking changes in the CD/HS states.

## Speed auto-switching

Commands can be sent to the modem at either 300 or 1200 baud. When the character is received in command mode, the modem will automatically switch to the correct speed. This flips both the state of the high speed (HS) indicator and the SIO interrupt line. The character that triggers this switch is still recognized and processed correctly.

The SX212 powers up in high-speed mode.

