## 9.17 410/1010 Program Recorder

The 410 and 1010 Program Recorders are cassette tape recorders with a connection to the SIO bus.

## Motor control

The SIO motor control line enables the 410/1010 recorder motor under computer control, allowing the tape to be stopped on demand. The Play or Record button must also be depressed on the 410 for the motor to activate.

The motor control line also serves as the voltage source for the audio track, cutting out the audio when the motor is deactivated. A side effect of this is that rapid toggling of the motor control line will be reflected as audio on the computer when the 410/1010 is connected.

## Data decoding and encoding

During playback, the data track is processed by two bandpass filters centered at ~4kHz and ~5KHz. The amplitudes of the two filters are compared and the result is sent across the SIO bus, with the 4KHz filter producing a 0 and the 5KHz filter producing a 1. This decodes the frequency shift keying (FSK) encoding used to record data onto the tape.

When recording, the SIO bus data is recorded directly onto the tape. This is normally done with two-tone mode with timers 1 and 2 clocked with the 64KHz clock with divisors of 6 and 8 (AUDF1=5 and AUDF2=7), giving 5327Hz and 3995Hz as the two tones.

Serial data is recorded onto the tape LSB-first, so every byte is written with a start bit, bits 0 to 7, and then a stop bit.

## Turbo modifications

A popular modification to Atari cassette tape recorders involves adding a turbo mode that bypasses the FSK bandpass filters. This allows for higher data rates to be recorded onto the tape, at the cost of additional complexity to manually modulate the signal. This is often activated by lowering the command line.

