## 9.19 Pocket Modem

The Pocket Modem, by BOT Engineering, is a small SIO-based, 300 baud modem.

## Data transfers

POKEY's standard serial port functionality is used for full-duplex communication with the modem. There is no setting for baud rate on the modem itself; the baud rate is determined solely by the rate at which POKEY sends and receives data. Supported baud rates are 110, 210, 300, and 500 baud.

## Command protocol

The Pocket Modem does not use the standard SIO command protocol. Instead, it uses a custom command protocol based on both the command and motor control lines. The command line serves as the data line and the motor line serves as a clock.

Each command provides the setting for four mode bits on the device. The bits, in shifting order are:

- Bit 0 : Enables data communication. When this is set, the modem transfers data between the SIO bus and the phone line.
- Bit 1 : Off-hook state. Takes the phone off-hook (1) to answer or dial, or places it on-hook (0) to hang up.
- Bit 2 : Sets the carrier frequencies to originate (0) or answer (1).
- Bit 3 : Enables dialing if set to 1.

The command line is set to low for a 0 or high for a 1, and is shifted into the device on the falling edge (asserting edge) of the motor control line. There does not appear to be a direct indicator of when the last bit is shifted. The shift rate is very slow, about one bit every six video frames in the standard driver.

Commonly used modes include %0000 to hang up, %0011 for communication when originating a call, %0111 for comm when answering a call, %0010 or %0110 when temporarily suspending a call for disk access, and %1010 when dialing.

## Pulse dialing

Tone dialing is not supported by the Pocket Modem, but it does support pulse dialing. Pulse dialing is enabled by switching to mode %1010, which takes the phone off hook and enables dialing mode. In dialing mode, the command line is used to control the on-hook state, such that asserting command (low) takes the phone off-hook, and negating command (high) places it back on-hook. Pulse dialing is then performed by pulsing the on-hook state with timing under software control.

## Carrier detect

The SIO proceed line is used to communicate carrier detect state to the computer. It is asserted (low) when a remote carrier is absent and negated (high) when a carrier is present.

## Ring detect

Auto-answer is also supported by means of a ring detection signal on the SIO interrupt line. The Pocket Modem sends pulses on the interrupt line whenever ringing is detected. It cannot answer the phone automatically, but software can count the ring pulses and switch the Pocket Modem to on-hook answer mode once enough pulses have arrived.

