## 9.2 Poll Commands

The host computer can poll the SIO bus to automatically discover and download handlers from each device. This is done by sending polling commands out onto the bus and checking if any devices respond.

## Type 0 Poll

A Type 0 Poll is essentially a disk boot - a request for sector 1 on D1:, which is then interpreted as a disk boot sector and results in consecutive sectors being read from disk. A peripheral can emulate a 'disk' drive in order to satisfy a Type 0 Poll. 44 A peripheral can delay responding to a sector read until a number of consecutive get status requests have been received in order to ensure that any real disk drive at the D1: address has a chance to respond first.

The 850 Interface Module and 1030 Modems respond to Type 0 Polls.

## Type 1 Poll

Command $3F (?) is used to perform a Type 1 Poll. 45 The device ID, AUX1, and AUX2 are not used, and the command returns 12 bytes if successful. These 12 bytes are the device control block (DCB) to be used with the OS SIO to read in the bootstrap loader starting at $0500, which is then invoked by a JSR to $0506. 46 This is similar enough to a disk boot that the same image can be used for both. The 850 Interface Module responds to this type of poll.

AUX1 determines the device being targeted by the Type 1 Poll. AUX1=0 selects the next device that has not

[44] [AHS05] p.8

[45] [AHS05] p.10

[46] The $0506 start address is, in fact, hardcoded by DOS 2.0's AUTORUN.SYS.

been polled, with devices being prioritized by the different number of retries they wait for until answering the command. The only device known to handle a Type 1 Poll is the 850 Interface Module, which handles the 26 th iteration of AUX1=$00 or the first instance of AUX1=$01.

DOS 2.0S's default AUTORUN.SYS issues a Type 1 Poll, but it has a quirk that requires the device bootstrap to follow a few rules:

- Only one device's handler can load, as only one successful poll is handled.
- As noted, the entry point to the bootstrap routine must be at $0506.
- The bootstrap routine must hook (DOSINI) such that the next call to it does not chain through to DOS.

Another shortcoming of a Type 1 Poll is that a device will only respond affirmatively to it once, and then never again until it is power-cycled.

## Warning

Type 1 Polls overlap with the Return High Speed Index command commonly used with disk drives for US Doubler style high-speed transfer operation. See 10.3 Extended protocols for more information. For this reason it is best to avoid issuing a Type 1 Poll command with any disk drive ID ($31-3F), or generally any known device ID.

## Type 2 Poll

Command $3F is also used for Type 2 Polls. 47 However, no other information is available about them.

## Type 3 Poll

Type 3 Polls are documented in the XL Addendum and use both address $4F and command $40 (@) together. 48 Unlike a Type 1 Poll, Type 3 Polls allow the host to restart the process and re-poll peripherals without requiring them to be power-cycled, and also stream the handler in a standardized relocatable form instead of needing the peripheral to handle relocation itself. The host is required to use address $4F and command $40, but devices are allowed to only check for the command. This means that command $40 is globally reserved across all device IDs. 49

The Poll Reset command resets all peripherals and restarts the polling process. It is issued with AUX1 and AUX2 set to $4F. No peripherals are supposed to actually reply to a Poll Reset - it is simply sent blind.

AUX1/AUX2=$00 is the main poll command. Every peripheral that responds to a Type 3 Poll responds to a unique retry of this command, i.e. one device may respond to the initial command, while another device might only respond to the 4 th . This requires that each device count off the number of consecutive times this command has been received. There are 28 slots available since that is the number of attempts from the OS (13 command retries with one device error retry gives (1 + 13) × 2 = 28 attempts).

On a successful poll, the device returns a four byte payload with the following data: handler size (low byte), handler size (high byte), device ID, and version ID. The device ID can then be used to address the device directly to load the handler. The handler size must be even. 50 Afterward, the device remembers the successful poll so that it doesn't respond to it again until a poll reset is issued.

A Null Poll is issued by setting AUX1/AUX2=$4E. This effectively serves as a no-op command that does nothing but restart a polling sequence, resetting the retry counters for each device.

<!-- image -->

The XL/XE OS issues a Type 3 Poll after boot and before run.

## Type 4 Poll

A Type 4 Poll is similar to a Type 3 Poll except that it is triggered by a request for a specific device. 51 The address and command are the same - $4F/$40 - but AUX1 contains the device name and unit number together in ATASCII. For instance, a request for H: or H1: would have $48/$01 in the AUX bytes.

The XL/XE OS issues a Type 4 Poll on an attempt to access a nonexistent CIO device.

## Type 3/4 Handler Loading

When a device has been successfully found via a Type 3 or Type 4 Poll, the handler is then loaded from the device directly using the download command $26, using the device ID from the poll. AUX1 is set to a block number, starting at zero and counting up as many blocks as necessary according to the handler size. On success, a 128 byte payload is returned. Invalid block numbers can result in either a NAK or lack of response. 52

## Type 3/4 Handler Format

The blocks of handler data returned by the download command, when reassembled, form a stream of data to load and relocate a 6502 machine program. This module consists of two main relocatable sections, a zero-page section and a non-zero-page section, as well as optional non-relocatable sections at absolute addresses. The program is assembled from records in the stream, with each record defined by a leading type byte. All records except for the end record are followed by a length byte, which includes everything except the type and length bytes.

## Text records (record types $00, $01, and $0A)

A text record delivers up to 255 bytes of a section. $00 is for the non-zero page section, $01 is for the zero-page section, and $0A is for a non-relocatable section. The payload consists of a 16-bit offset from the beginning of the section, followed by the section data.

## Relocation records (record types $02-09)

Relocation records are used to adjust references within sections to point to the final location of those or other sections. The references in the section data initially contain the offset from the beginning of the target section; the address of the target section is added to produce the final referenced address.

There are eight types of reference:

| Token   | Referencing section type   | Target section type   | Reference type           |
|---------|----------------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------|
| $02     | Non zero page              | Non zero page         | Low byte of word address |
| $03     | Zero page                  | Non zero page         | Low byte of word address |
| $04     | Non zero page              | Zero page             | Byte address             |
| $05     | Zero page                  | Zero page             | Byte address             |
| $06     | Non zero page              | Non zero page         | Word address             |

[51]

[ATAXL] p.23

[52] [AHS05] p.11

Table 30: Peripheral Handler Relocation Record Types

| Token   | Referencing section type   | Target section type   | Reference type            |
|---------|----------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------|
| $07     | Zero page                  |                       |                           |
| $08     | Non zero page              |                       | High byte of word address |
| $09     | Zero page                  |                       |                           |

The locations of the references to be relocated are specified in the payload as byte offsets from the beginning of the last text record. This means that relocation records need to be interleaved with text records and that word addresses should not be split across text record boundaries.

Record types $08 and $09 are special as they adjust references consisting of only the high byte of the target address. This is an unusual relocation type and allows handlers to be relocated anywhere in memory, not just to page boundaries. For these types, the offset data consists of pairs of bytes instead of single bytes, where the first byte of each pair is the offset and the second byte is the low byte of the reference offset. The low byte in the relocation data is combined with the high byte in the text record to form the reference offset, which is then added to the section address to produce the target address. The high byte of this target address is then written back to the section.

## End record (record type $0B)

The last record in the handler is type $0B, which signifies the end of the relocation stream. Unlike the other record types, no length byte is included. Instead, the $0B token is followed by three bytes:

- Self-start byte: $00 for no self start, $01 to automatically invoke an absolute address, and $02 to invoke a relocated address within the non-zero-page section.
- 16-bit start relative or absolute start address.

