## 9.3 820 40 Column Printer

The Atari 820 40 Column Printer is a device with a similar case to the Atari 810 Disk Drive, but printing on narrow 3.75' roll paper coming out the top. It is natively supported by the P: device in the built-in OS and is notable for defining the base protocol that later printers also used.

## SIO addressing

The 820 responds to SIO address $40. Only two commands are supported, Write ($57) and Status ($53).

## Status command ($53)

The first status byte returned by the 820 indicates whether a command frame error (bit 0) or data frame error (bit 1) has occurred.

The second status byte contains the orientation byte passed in AUX1 from the last Write command.

The third status byte is set to the 820 timeout value of $06, and the unused status byte is set to $00.

## Print Line command ($57)

The Print Line command is a write command that sends a line to the printer and waits for it to print. AUX1 is set

to either $4E (Normal) or $53 (Sideways) for the character orientation; this also determines whether the line is 40 characters or 29 characters long, and thus the length of the data frame. 53 The sideways mode rotates characters right 90° relative to normal orientation, so that characters are oriented and read from the right to the left. Any AUX1 value other than $4E or $53 produces a command error + NAK.

The data payload of the write command is the line, padded to the maximum line length. Bit 7 of each character is ignored. Although the OS P: handler inserts EOL characters into this buffer and other printers use these EOLs, the 820 ignores them. Instead, any character outside of the supported character set is converted to a space, including EOLs. Thus, characters after the EOL aren't ignored and must be filled with a whitespace-equivalent character for the 820 to print correctly, usually EOLs or spaces.

In sideways orientation, successive characters from the data frame are arranged right-to-left, with the first character in the buffer being printed at the right margin. However, the printer still prints the line left to right.

## Character set

In normal orientation, the character set supported by the 820 is the standard ASCII, not ATASCII. $20-7E / $A0FE is supported. Any other character is converted to a space, including DEL ($7F) and ESC / EOL ($1B/$9B).

Sideways orientation supports a more limited character set. Only $30-5F are supported, with $60-7F being mapped down to $40-5F, thus mapping lowercase to uppercase. However, $5E/7E and $5F/7F differ as well. They print an up (↑) and left arrow (←) respectively relative to the sideways text, or right/up relative to normal text. Oddly, this means that $7F is a printable character in sideways mode but blank in normal mode.

The character matrix in normal orientation is 5x7 with one additional blank column in between. In sideways mode, it is 7x7 with a blank column.

[53] There is a error in [OSManual] p. 197, which says that the orientation is sent in AUX2.

sz(3*

