## 9.5 1020 Color Printer

The Atari 1020 Color Printer is a four-color plotter compatible with the 820 SIO protocol. It shares a mechanism and some firmware with a number of other plotters that use a similar ALPS mechanism, such as the Sega SP400, Tandy CGP-115, and the Commodore VIC-1520. However, the front end device interface and character set are specific to the 1020.

The information below is gathered from various sources since device testing was not possible. Sources include the user manuals for the ALPS mechanism devices listed above, the 1020 Owner's Guide, 1020 Service Manual, the programs on the 1020 master disk, and the 1020 diagnostic program. The 1020 diagnostic program in particular stresses a lot of the undocumented behaviors of the firmware.

## SIO device ID

The 1020 responds to the device IDs for P1: ($40) and P4: ($43). 54

## Print mechanism

Unlike other printers that use dot matrix or impact printing, the 1020 is a plotter with XY movement. The print head moves back and forth on the horizontal axis while the paper is fed in both directions for vertical movement. This allows the 1020 to print anywhere on the paper, shuttling back and forth in all directions.

Four pens are mounted on the print head: black, blue, green, and red. The printer can switch between pens at any time, but must return the print head to the left to do so. The print head can also lift the pen off the page to move without drawing.

## Printing text

By default, the printer starts in text mode and prints characters with a vector font. Initially, the printer outputs 40 characters per line and can be reconfigured for 20 or 80 characters per line.

The text font is composed of lines in 8-way directions on a 6x8 grid, with most characters fitting in 5x8 with a blank column on the right. Characters are scaled unformly, so characters are both twice as high and twice as wide in 20 column mode and half width/height in 80 column mode. At 80 columns, the characters are printed at the limit of the 1020's positioning resolution.

Because lines longer than 40 characters are supported, the 1020 splices lines received in successive Write commands until the line is full or an EOL is encountered.

## Character set

The 1020's character set is the same as the ATASCII international character set, with the exception of $1B (ESC) being inaccessible.

When international characters are disabled, characters $00-1F are ignored and characters $60, $7B, and $7D7F are blanked.

## Escape commands

ESC is used to initiate commands from text mode. Consecutive ESC characters are treated the same as a single ESC, so ESC ESC W is the same as ESC CTRL+W.

[54] [8BitFAQ], section 4.2.

ESC CTRL+P, ESC CTRL+N, and ESC CTRL+S select 20, 40, or 80 characters per line. This scales characters uniformly, so the height of each character is scaled along with its width.

ESC CTRL+W enables international characters. ESC CTRL+X disables them.

ESC CTRL+G enters graphics mode.

## Graphics mode

In graphics mode, the 1020 interprets lines as graphics commands instead of as text to be printed. This enables the graphics plotting capabilities as well as more flexible text printing. Graphics mode continues until exited with the A command.

Although the 1020 manual describes escape commands as text mode commands, they can be issued from graphics mode as well, resulting in an exit to text mode. The 1020 diagnostics program depends on this.

## Graphics coordinate system

The coordinate system is bottom-up, with horizontal positions in the range 0-480 and the vertical axis being infinite. Coordinates are specified in two ways, absolute and relative. Absolute coordinates are relative to a home position, while relative coordinates are relative to the last position. Coordinates are specified in the range of -999 to +999.

The behavior of the 1020 when horizontal coordinates are out of range is not documented, but is suspected to be the same as the VIC-1520, which is documented as stopping the command when the pen would go out of bounds. The pen is moved using Bresenham's algorithm, so it stops at the nearest point to the line on column 0 or 480.

## Numeric parsing

Most graphics commands have at least one numeric argument. Numbers can be in the range of -999 to 999, with only the last three integral digits being kept. If four or more digits are specified, earlier digits are discarded, effectively computing the number mod 1000. For instance, -1290 is parsed as -290.

The 1020 has limited support for parsing floating-point numbers. Fractional digits after a period are dropped, truncating the number to integer. Characters after a capital E are also dropped, converting small numbers in scientific notation to zero, such as 4.7E-06.

## Argument and command delimiters

Arguments are separated by a comma or by one or more spaces.

By default, commands are ended at EOL. More than one command can be specified on a line by separating them with asterisks.

Semicolons can be used to repeat a command with different arguments, i.e. J0,100;-50,0.

## Graphics commands

## A: exit graphics mode

The A command exits graphics mode. The print head is returned to the left margin.

## Cn: Set color

The C command changes the current color, switching pens if needed. Values 0, 1, 2, and 3 select black, blue, green, and red, respectively.

If a value larger than 0-3 is specified, only the low two bits are used.

## Ln: Set line style

The L command sets the line style, enabling or disabling dashed lines and setting the length of the dash. L0 selects solid lines. For dashed lines, the value determines the width of dashes and spaces, which are always equally balanced. L1, for instance, selects the finest dot spacing with 240 dots across.

The dash pattern always starts with a space at the start of the line and is truncated at the end of the line. This differs from some other printers, such as the VIC-1520, which carry over the pattern offset to subsequent lines.

If a value larger than 15 is specified, the lowest four bits are used.

## Q: Set text orientation

Q sets the text orientation in 90° increments clockwise. Q0 specifies to the right, Q1 down, Q2 left, and Q3 up.

If a value larger than 3 is specified, the lowest two bits are used.

## S: Set text scale

S sets the size of text. A value of 0 specifies a scale of 1×, the same size as 80-column text. The largest value of 63 gives a scale factor of 64×.

If a value larger than 63 is used, the lowest six bits are used.

## H: Return to home position

The H command moves the pen back to the home position, which is used as the origin for absolute coordinates and can be modified by printing newlines or the I command.

## I: Initialize

The I command sets the home position to the current pen position. Commands using absolute coordinates will evaluate those positions relative to the new home position.

## M: Move to absolute point

M moves the pen to a new position without drawing a line. The position is specified in absolute coordinates relative to the home position.

## R: Move to relative point

R moves the pen to a new position using coordinates relative to the current position.

## D: Draw using absolute points

D draws a line segment using points in absolute coordinates, relative to the home position.

## J: Draw using relative points

J draws a line segment using points in relative coordinates, with each point relative to the current pen position.

## P: Print text

Prints the remainder of the line as a string. Graphics command parsing resumes with the next line.

