## 9.6 1025 80 Column Printer

The Atari 1025 is an SIO based printer that prints 80 columns on standard paper, with additional features for different density and spacing modes and an international character set. It is based on the 820 SIO protocol with extensions for escape codes and longer lines.

## SIO device ID

The 1025 responds to the device IDs for P1: ($40) and P3: ($42). This allows addressing the 1025 separately from other printers on the same bus.

## Write command

Similarly to the 820, the 1025 receives lines using the SIO Write command, $57. It only accepts (N)ormal width AUX1=$4E - and will NAK any other mode including 820 Sideways mode. Thus, the data frame is always 40 bytes long.

The way that the 1025 supports longer lines is by splicing data frames together based on EOLs in the data frame. Specifically, any data frame without an EOL is considered to be a partial line and appended onto the line unless there is an EOL present, which ends the line. Any characters after the EOL are ignored. If the line length is reached, the 1025 prints out the full line and keeps the remainder for the next line.

The printer cannot print while communicating with the computer and cannot incrementally print lines. All partial lines are buffered in printer memory until EOL or a full line is reached, at which time the 1025 prints a complete line after sending ACK and before sending Complete to the computer.

Attempting to write to the printer when the printer is out of paper results in an Error being returned in response to the Write command. This happens even if there is no EOL and a partial line is being written that wouldn't result in printing actually happening yet.

## Line overflow

When the 1025 receives enough characters to fill the line without an EOL, it will immediately print the line before processing the remainder of the data frame and returning Complete for the Write command that filled the line.

If a line is exactly filled this way and then an EOL is printed, the EOL will not cause an additional blank line to be printed. Thus, printing 80 characters, an EOL, then more characters and a second EOL will print two lines back to back without a blank line in between.

## Escape commands

The 1025 owner manual documents several escape codes that can be used to modify the printer's behavior. Most of these commands can only be used at the beginning of the line before printable characters are sent.

Three of these set character density:

- ESC CTRL+T: Sets character density to 16.5 characters per inch.
- ESC CTRL+O: Sets character density to 10 characters per inch.
- ESC CTRL+N: Sets character density to 5 characters per inch.

Two set the line width:

- ESC S: Sets short line width (32, 64, or 105 characters depending on density).
- ESC L: Sets long line width (40, 80, or 132 characters depending on density).

Short lines are centered on the page relative to long lines.

Two commands set the line spacing:

- ESC 6: Sets line spacing to 6 lines per inch.
- ESC 8: Sets line spacing to 8 lines per inch.

The line spacing setting determines how far the paper is advanced after a line is printed, so a change to it first affects the space after the current line.

The effects of all escape commands carry over to subsequent lines until the pertinent setting is changed again. The power on defaults are 10 CPI, long lines, and 6 LPI.

All of these escape commands can only be issued at the beginning of the line, and are ignored if given in the middle of the line (nothing printed). Specifically, they must be issued at the first column of the line. Thus, it isn't possible to mix densities on the same line. Non-printed characters, such as control characters with European characters disabled, don't count for this, so while A ESC CTRL+T A results in AA being printed at current density, CTRL+A ESC CTRL+T A will print A at 16.5 CPI. Line control escape codes do work when issued immediately after wrapping to column 1 without an EOL, i.e.: 80 x A, ESC, CTRL+N.

Any unrecognized escape sequence is ignored. Redundant escape characters are also ignored but still enable escape processing, so ESC ESC CTRL+T acts the same as ESC CTRL+T.

Bit 7 is ignored on the escape code, so ESC $36 and ESC $B6 both set 6 LPI. Bit 7 is not ignored on the ESC character itself because ESC ($1B) with the high bit set is $9B (EOL).

## Character set support

By default, the 1025 supports 91 printable characters of the ATASCII character set. Specifically, characters $205F, $61-7A, and $7C are supported; $60 and $7B print as blanks, while $00-1A and $1C-1F are ignored. Bit 7 is ignored except for $1B (ESC) / $9B (EOL). Most of the characters are the same as ASCII, with the exception of $7D (home arrow), $7E (backspace / black arrow left), and $7F (tab / black arrow right).

European characters can be enabled with ESC CTRL+W and disabled with ESC CTRL+X. Unlike other escape codes, these can be issued anywhere in a line and take effect for following characters, carrying over to subsequent lines. Turning on European character support enables printing of character codes $00-1A, $1C-1F, $60, and $7B, with the same definitions as the XL/XE international ATASCII character set:

|   Code | Character   | Code   | Character   | Code 0C   |   Character | Code Character   |
|--------|-------------|--------|-------------|-----------|-------------|------------------|
|     00 | á           | 06     | ò           | Ö         |          12 | û                |
|     01 | ù           | 07     | ì           | 0D ú      |          13 | î                |
|     02 | Ñ           | 08     | £           | 0E ó      |          14 | é                |
|     03 | É           | 09     | ï           | 0F ö      |          15 | è                |
|     04 | ç           | 0A     | ü           | 10 Ü      |          16 | ñ                |
|     05 | ô           | 0B     | ä           | 11 â      |          17 | ê                |

| Code   | Character   |
|--------|-------------|
| 18     | å           |
| 19     | à           |
| 1A     | Å           |
| 1C     | ↑           |
| 1D     | ↓           |
| 1E     | ←           |
| 1F     | →           |
| 60     | ¡           |
| 7B     | Ä           |

áùÑéc8ở1£1üäd0óöüåứтéèñẻáàA+*+→ !"#$%&amp; ()*+,-./0123456789:; (=) ?AABCDEFGHIJKLMNOP

QRSTUVWXYZ[\]^\_iabcdefghijklmnoparstuvwxyzäl54}

ấûRểsõôì£ỉŨä00ớ0üảứ1ế0xẻ690++*→

## Dot matrix

Characters are designed using a 9x7 matrix, with three columns of space in between. The character patterns are arranged so that the printer avoids printing two consecutive dots on the same row, but the columns are spaced narrowly to effectively give a 5x7 matrix with half-dot horizontal precision. Vertically, there isn't enough space to do true descenders with 7 rows, so characters like g and p are raised.

16.5 CPI uses the same character pattern as 10 CPI mode, just with the head moving more slowly and columns spaced more closely. In 5 CPI mode, the columns are spaced apart, but also made bold by bitwise ORing each column into the next column as well, i.e. column 1, then column 1+2, then column 2+3, etc. This effectively converts each 9x7 character into a 10x7 character, with two columns of space in between.

Figure 20: 1025 character set

## Status command

The 1025 responds to the Status command with standard command/data frame error flags in the first byte, $00 in the second byte, $0F as the timeout, and $30 for the unused byte. It does not send the last orientation in the second byte as the 820 does.

Unusually, the 1025 also clears its internal state when processing the Status command. Settings are reset back to 10 CPI, 6 LPI, long line width, European characters disabled, and the line buffer is cleared. As the OS P: handler issues a Status command on open, this effectively resets the 1025 each time the P: device is opened.

This has the greatest effect on the BASIC LPRINT command, which opens and closes the P: device for each line printed. It causes all escape sequences to lose their effect between lines, and on the 400/800 OS, can discard some characters remaining in the print buffer.

