## 9.9 1029 Hardware

The 1029 is based around an 8048-based 8039 microcontroller running at 10MHz, with 4K of external program ROM for firmware.

[56] Information about the Polish character set courtesy of atariki: http://atariki.krap.pl/index.php/ATASCII

## Firmware revisions

There are two known firmware revisions for the 1029: an English version with CRC32 [19C4F811], and a Polish version with CRC32 [F59D137C]. The Polish version is the same as the English version except for changes to the character set and an apparent corrupted first byte at 0000h.

## I/O usage

Table 36: 1029 8039 I/O connections

| Port   | Signal   | Direction   | Usage                        | Polarity         |
|--------|----------|-------------|------------------------------|------------------|
| Misc   | INT      | Input       | SIO READY                    | 0 = not ready    |
| Misc   | T0       | Input       | SIO DATAOUT (from computer)  | inverted         |
| Misc   | T1       | Input       | Dot timing signal            | 1 = dot pulse    |
| Port 1 | P1.7     | Output      | Motor enable                 | 0 = activated    |
| Port 1 | P1.6     | Output      | Pin hammer enable            | 0 = activated    |
| Port 1 | P1.5     | Output      | Home solenoid enable         | 0 = activated    |
| Port 1 | P1.4     | Output      | Line feed motor power enable | 0 = activated    |
| Port 1 | P1.3     | Output      | Line feed phase bit 1        | 1 = phase 2/3    |
| Port 1 | P1.2     | Output      | Line feed phase bit 0        | 1 = phase 1/2    |
| Port 1 | P1.1     | Output      | Lamp enable                  | 1 = enabled      |
| Port 1 | P1.0     | Output      | SIO DATA IN (to computer)    | non-inverted     |
| Port 2 | P2.7     | Input       | Home position sensor         | 1 = head at home |
| Port 2 | P2.6     | Input       | SIO COMMAND                  | 1 = asserted     |
| Port 2 | P2.5     | Input       | Self-test switch             | 1 = enabled      |
| Port 2 | P2.4     | -           | Not used                     |                  |
| Port 2 | P2.3     | Output      | External ROMA11              |                  |
| Port 2 | P2.2     | Output      | External ROMA10              |                  |
| Port 2 | P2.1     | Output      | External RAM / ROMA9         |                  |
| Port 2 | P2.0     | Output      | External RAM / ROMA8         |                  |

An additional 1024 x 4-bit static RAM provides bit image data storage, since 480 columns of 7-bit dot patterns must be stored to print a line. The static RAM's data lines are connected to AD0-AD3 on the 8039.

## Head positioning mechanism

The head solenoid and motor enables control the left and right movement of the head across the platen. The motor, when enabled, pulls the head toward the right at a constant speed of approximately 5 inches per second.

Activating the head solenoid disconnects the motor from the carriage and allows a spring to retract the head back to the far left, at a somewhat faster rate than it normally advances. The home sensor signal received on P2.7 indicates when the print head has reached the home position at the far left. While disengaged, the motor can still be activated; this is used by the firmware to bring the motor up to speed before engaging it for better speed consistency.

## Dot printing mechanism

The 1029's print head design is unusual in having only a single hammer to print all of the dots in the dot matrix.

This design is shared by some other printers including the CBM MPS-801 and Amstrad DMP1, which share a similar Seikosha design. However, the 1029 differs in some implementation details such as the dot timing pattern and the polarity of some signals.

When the motor is enabled, the platen rotates at a high speed at the same time. Bumps on the platen sweep down the print area, raising different points on the paper. This allows the print hammer to impact only one point on the page at a time. The platen bump sweeps down through the print area once for each column so that each of the seven dots of the column can be printed before moving to the next column.

A dot timing signal is provided to the 8039 on the T1 input to accurately time the activation of the print hammer. The dot signal is normally low and receives a series of 7 high pulses when each dot in the column should be printed. There is an idle period of approximately two dot times (or ~0.9ms from pulse start to pulse start) between each column to give the head time to advance and to indicate to the MCU when each column starts. The firmware relies on the dot timing signal pattern being received whenever the motor is running, even if it is disengaged from the carriage by the head solenoid.

During the printing of each column, the head is continuously moving right, which would normally cause a slight rightward skew of the printed output due to the successive delays in printing each dot. The print head is angled slightly oppositely to counteract this so that the printed dots in each column are vertically aligned.

## Line feed motor

Port 1 bits P1.2, P1.3, and P1.4 control the 4-phase line feed motor that advances the paper. P1.4 is the power enable and is pulled low to activate a motor phase; P1.2 and P1.3 select the phase to activate. The sequence to advance the paper is 00, 01, 11, 10, with P1.2 turning on first. The paper advances by 1/144th of an inch with each successive phase, so phases are advanced 16 times for 9 LPI spacing and 24 times for 6 LPI spacing.

