## 12.3 Ultimate1MB

Ultimate1MB, or U1MB for short, is a multifunction device installed internally to the computer that provides a number of expansion functions, some of which are not possible externally: 81

- Up to 1MB of extended memory
- Selectable OS, BASIC, and game ROM images
- Computer-flashable firmware
- SpartaDOS X cartridge emulation
- Soft-enable and address decoding for other expansion peripherals
- Parallel Bus Interface device emulation

These features are primarily achieved by taking over the sockets used for the MMU and OS ROM.

[80] It is also valid to route the other way, with 0+3 to right and 1+2 to left. Apparently, Commodore couldn't get this consistently right in either the Amiga hardware manual or case markings.

[81] The author would like to thank Candle for providing Ultimate1MB technical information and hardware for testing.

For official programming information: [U1MB].

## CPLD revisions

There are two versions of the Complex Programmable Logic Device (CPLD) that drives the U1MB. Revision 1 contains the bulk of the functionality, but revision 2 adds support for Parallel Bus Interface (PBI) device emulation. The revision 1 CPLD is flash upgradable and can be updated to revision 2, although this cannot be done from the computer and requires an external CPLD programmer.

## Flash ROM

Much of the U1MB's functionality is a 4MBit (512K) flash device, which substitutes for all ROM in the system. It is directly mappable in 8K banks through the 8K read/write cartridge window and indirectly mappable as read-only through the BASIC, OS, and PBI address ranges.

Five memory ranges within the flash ROM have designated functions in the hardware. These include the bootstrap ROM at $50000-53FFF, the OS ROM banks at $70000-7FFFF, the BASIC ROM banks at $6000067FFF, the game ROM banks at $68000-6FFFF, and the PBI ROM banks at $58000-5FFFF. The remainder of the flash ROM has designated areas for mapping through the cartridge window, but these usages are not required by the hardware design.

The flash ROM is programmable in-place from the computer side as long as flash writing is enabled via bit 7 of UAUX [$D381]. When this is enabled, all memory windows that have flash ROM exposed also handle flash writes. This means, for instance, that it is possible to enter autoselect mode through writes to the OS ROM at $F555 and $FAAA. There is no reset facility for the flash ROM, so if the computer is reset while the flash ROM is in a programming or query state, the computer will fail to run the BIOS and a power cycle is required to recover.

When the flash ROM is write protected via bit 7 of UAUX [$D381], all writes to the flash ROM are blocked. This not only prevents inadvertent erasure or programming of the flash ROM, but also prevents entry into command or autoselect mode.

U1MB has shipped with multiple types of flash ROM which vary in significant ways. Early versions shipped with an Amic A29040 ($37/$86), whereas some newer models shipped with different devices such as an SST39SF040 ($BF/$B7). This distinction is important due to the variation in sector size (64K vs. 4K) and in sector programming sequences.

## Warning

Because there is only one flash ROM chip in Ultimate1MB, all flash ROM based mappings visible to the 6502 will change when the flash ROM mode is changed. This includes the OS ROM, BASIC ROM, game ROM, self-test ROM, and internal cartridge ROM. Therefore, entering autoselect mode through writes to the cartridge window will cause the OS ROM image to vanish, as $C000-CFFF and $D800-FFFF will return manufacturer and device code data instead of flash array data.

## BIOS ROM

On power-up, the BIOS ROM at $50000-53FFF in the flash ROM is mapped as the computer's bootstrap OS ROM. This is laid out in standard XL/XE OS ROM order, so $50000-50FFF is mapped to low OS ROM at $C000CFFF, $51800-53FFF is mapped to high OS ROM at $D800-DFFF, and $51000-517FF supplies the self-test ROM at $5000-57FF when enabled. The BIOS ROM handles U1MB initialization and configuration before handing off control to one of the four OS ROM slots at $70000-7FFFF in flash. The BIOS ROM is re-enabled and regains control on a reset.

Normally, the XL/XE OS has to detect whether a reset sequence corresponds to a cold reset or a warm reset by the presence of signature bytes in RAM. The BIOS need not do this as the U1MB provides a hardware register bit to indicate a cold boot. Bit 7 of COLDF [$D383] is set on power-up and can be cleared under software control to indicate a warm reset the next time the reset vector is invoked.

## OS, BASIC, and Game ROM

The flash ROM also contains four image slots each for the 16K OS and 8K BASIC ROMs present in a stock XL/XE, as well as the 8K game ROM additionally present in an XEGS. One of the four images can be independently selected of each type by the BIOS.

The game ROM is enabled by PORTB bit 6. It is only enabled if the U1MB is configured in XEGS mode by hardware jumper.

Figure 22: Ultimate1MB flash memory map

<!-- image -->

## Cartridge control

U1MB provides sufficient cartridge emulation facilities to run a version of SpartaDOS X (SDX). The flash ROM can be enabled in the left cartridge window at $A000-BFFF in 64 banks of 8K each, controlled by $D5E0. Although the lower half of flash ROM is assigned to cartridge emulation, this window actually allows all 512K of the flash ROM to be mapped and doubles as the window for updating flash ROM.

The upper two bits of the SDX control register allow toggling of both the internal and external cartridges: either can be enabled or both can be disabled. However, only the $8000-9FFF and $A000-BFFF windows of the external cartridge can be controlled; the cartridge control (CCTL) region at $D500-D5FF is always enabled. TRIG3 sensing is emulated so that it is asserted when either the internal or external cartridges are mapping $A000-BFFF.

Note that when enabled, the banking register overlaps with the CCTL region. The U1MB does not exclude this address from CCTL, meaning that a write to $D5E0 is handled both by U1MB and the external cartridge. A consequence of this is that U1MB's internal cartridge pass-through is incompatible with SIDE 1 as a write to this address will change the SIDE 1 bank even if the external cartridge is disabled. There is no issue if the internal cartridge is disabled by the BIOS, in which case U1MB's $D5E0 register is hidden.

## External device control

Several bits in UAUX [$D381] are devoted to controlling external devices. Bits 0-3 control external signals and otherwise have no meaning to U1MB itself, although they are conventionally labeled for COVOX and stereo POKEY enable signals.

Bits 4-5 control VideoBoard XE addressing, allowing selection between $D640, $D740, or disabling VBXE entirely. U1MB will automatically decode the $D6xx or $D7xx pages for VBXE if enabled, and in addition, automatically disable VBXE when those ranges are needed for I/O RAM. These bits have no effect if the VBXE enable signal is not hooked up to anything.

Bit 6 controls SoundBoard decoding. Unlike the other bits, it has an effect even if no SoundBoard is present: it prevents POKEY from being accessed at $D210-D2FF.

Bit 7 enables or disables writes to the flash ROM.

## Parallel Bus Interface device emulation (revision 2 CPLD only)

U1MB also allows for PBI device emulation through up to 8K of banked PBI ROM and an additional 0.8K of I/O RAM. The emulated PBI device can be configured to use bit 0, 2, 4, or 6 of the device select register at $D1FF; when selected, PBI ROM is enabled at $D800-DFFF as a math pack overlay. This overlays either RAM or OS ROM. Four banks of 2K are exposed from $59800, $5B800, $5D800, and $5F800 in the flash ROM, selectable through a bank switch register at $D1BF.

When PBI ROM is enabled, 895 bytes of I/O RAM are also exposed: 191 bytes at $D100-D1BE, 192 bytes at $D500-D5BF, and 512 bytes at $D600-D7FF. These bytes are from dedicated memory not otherwise accessible due to being shadowed by the I/O address region. When I/O RAM is active, these address ranges are blocked by the U1MB MMU so that they do not activate external cartridge control (CCTL) or VBXE accesses.

PBI device emulation is only available on U1MB devices with updated CPLD firmware; the original run lacks it.

## Warning

The A29040 flash chip used in some devices has a 64K sector size, which means that it is not possible to reflash the PBI ROM without erasing the BIOS ROM at the same time. This is risky as a corrupted BIOS will brick the computer, since the computer cannot boot without the BIOS ROM. Furthermore, if the PBI ROM is enabled, the OS will attempt to call into it on any SIO operation. Flashing software that updates either the BIOS or PBI ROMs must be written with this in mind.

## PBI button function (revision 2 CPLD only)

Although not required, the PBI device emulation functionality is intended to be used with the CompactFlash interface of a SIDE 2 cartridge. An additional 'PBI button' feature can be enabled in U1MB to take advantage of the reset button of the SIDE 2, allowing it to be used as an input to drive PBI-based disk emulation.

When the PBI button function is enabled, the left cartridge window ($A000-BFFF) of the external cartridge is suppressed, but can still be sensed via bit 6 of [$D384]. To detect a press of the reset button, the PBI firmware disables the SIDE 2 $A000-BFFF banking window; a press of the reset button causes the cartridge to reset to bank 0 with the window enabled, which can then be sensed via $D384. While the button can be sensed regardless, the PBI button function prevents $A000-BFFF from suddenly being overlaid by the external cartridge.

The PBI button function must be disabled for external cartridges to work normally.

## Real-time clock

A Maxim DS1305 real-time clock chip on the U1MB provides a clock and 96 bytes of non-volatile user storage. Both are battery backed up and thus persist across power cycles. The RTC is connected via Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) bus and communication occurs serially through three bits in RTCIN/RTCOUT [$D3E2]. Since it is hooked up in 4-wire configuration, the clock may be driven with either polarity per the DS1305 specs.

The DS1305 has timing specs that are difficult but not impossible to violate using the stock 6502. One way to do so is to attempt to change CE (chip enable) or SDO (serial data out) in the same write as a change to SCLK (serial clock). This can violate the setup/hold timing requirements for the DS1305. The timing constraints on CE (chip enable) can also be exceeded by back-to-back stores. A 65C816 accelerator running in fast RAM can do so much more easily and more care is required when driving the DS1305 from an accelerator.

## Config lock

When the BIOS is invoked on power-up or reset, the U1MB is initially in unlocked mode. This enables I/O RAM at $D100-D1BE, $D500-D5BF, and $D600-D7FF and the configuration registers. BASIC and GAME ROM are disabled and inaccessible. If enabled, these regions map to the same region as the internal cartridge window.

Once the BIOS is finished configuring the system, the configuration is locked by setting bit 7 of UCTL [$D380]. This swaps out the BIOS, enables the selected OS/GAME/BASIC ROMs and disables the configuration registers. Since the BIOS ROM image is swapped out in this process, a jump into RAM is usually necessary to trigger the config lock and then invoke the RESET vector on the OS ROM.

Config lock cannot be turned off in software once enabled and can only be reverted by a reset.

## Memory mapping

The U1MB contains 1MB of extended memory, which can be enabled through UCTL[1:0]. This memory is only used for PORTB extended memory. Normal memory, and the I/O memoy enabled in PBI and config lock modes, still comes from the memory on the motherboard.

## Non-canonical PIA access incompatibility

Normally, the entire address range $D300-D3FF is mapped to the Peripheral Interface Adapter (PIA). However, in an U1MB system, $D380-D3FF is reserved for U1MB registers, and the PIA responds only to $D300-D37F. This is true at all times, regardless of configuration or config lock state. Memory locations that do not correspond to a readable U1MB register return undriven bus data.

## Extended memory banking anomaly

Most memory expansions leverage the unused bits in PIA port B to select the extended memory bank. In the 576K and 1088K modes, this leads to a conflict with bits 1, 6, and 7, which control BASIC, XEGS Game, and self-test ROMs, respectively. Some memory expansions simply take over some of these bits, disabling the selftest ROM and/or requiring an external switch for BASIC.

Because U1MB shadows the PIA rather than using the output of PIA port B, it has unusual behavior here: in 576K and 1088K modes, it modifies BASIC / Game / self-test enables based on changes to bits 1, 6, and 7 only for writes that have the CPU window disabled (bit 4 = 1). This has three odd consequences: it means that PORTB writes are now sequence dependent as there are 11 bits of state being driven by 8 bits of written data, these ROMs can be enabled while the expanded memory window is active, and in 576K mode, these ROMs can be toggled while changing banking bits with only the ANTIC window enabled.

## Cartridge sense anomaly

In XL/XE hardware, TRIG3 senses the state of the left cartridge window ($A000-BFFF) to provide a cartridge detection mechanism. This is emulated by U1MB so that when the internal cartridge is enabled, TRIG3 is active as expected. However, this is done by intercepting reads from TRIG3 in a way that is not sensitive to the trigger latching feature enabled by bit 2 of GRACTL. This means that if either the internal or external cartridge is unmapped from $A000-BFFF while trigger latching is enabled on a U1MB equipped system, TRIG3 will not stay 1 as ordinarily expected.

## Registers

## $D1BF UPBIBANK - PBI ROM bank select (write only; PBI ROM active only)

| Ignored            | Ignored            | BANK   |
|--------------------|--------------------|--------|
| D1:D0 PBI ROM bank | D1:D0 PBI ROM bank |        |
| 00                 | $59800-59FFF       |        |
| 01                 | $5B800-5BFFF       |        |
| 10                 | $5D800-5DFFF       |        |
| 11                 | $5F800-5FFFF       |        |

Controls the ROM bank mapped at $D800-DFFF when PBI emulation is active. This register is invisible and the bank is reset to 0 whenever the PBI device is deselected.

## $D380 UCTL - Main configuration (write only; config unlocked only)

| LCK   | IOR   | Ign.   | SDX   | OS   | MEM   |
|-------|-------|--------|-------|------|-------|

| D7   | Config lock   |
|------|---------------|
|      | 0 No change   |
|      | 1 Lock config |

## D6 I/O RAM enable

0 I/O RAM disabled

1 I/O RAM enabled

## D4 SpartaDOS X (SDX) module enable

0 SDX module enabled

1 SDX module disabled

## D3:D2 OS ROM select

00 $70000-73FFF

01 $74000-77FFF

10 $78000-7BFFF

11 $7C000-7FFFF

## D1:D0 Memory configuration

00 64K - no extended RAM

01 320K Rambo - PORTB bits 2, 3, 5, and 6 control bank; bit 4 controls CPU+ANTIC access

10 576K Compy - PORTB bits 1, 2, 3, 6, and 7; bit 4 controls CPU access, bit 5 controls ANTIC access

11 1088K - PORTB bits 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7; bit 4 controls CPU+ANTIC access

## $D381 UAUX - Auxiliary configuration (write only; config unlocked only)

| WE   | SB   | VBXE   | S1   | S0   | M1   | M0   |
|------|------|--------|------|------|------|------|

## D7 Flash write enable

0 Flash writes enabled

1 Flash writes disabled

## D6 SoundBoard enable

0 $D210-D2FF assigned to SoundBoard

1 $D210-D2FF assigned to POKEY

## D5:D4 VideoBoard XE (VBXE) address

00 $D640

01 $D740

1x Disabled

## D3:D0 S1/S0/M1/M0 signal outputs

Controls flash and external device decoding. If flash writes are enabled, all memory windows that are mapped to the flash ROM accept writes; otherwise, writes to flash are blocked.

The M0 output signal is a generic output with no specific behavior in the U1MB, but is commonly connected to a switch to toggle a stereo POKEY expansion. When connected, setting bit 0 = 1 enables address decoding and analog output for the second POKEY.

## $D382 UPBI/UCAR - PBI/cartridge configuration (write only; config unlocked only)

| GAME   | BASIC   | BTN   | PBI   | PBI_ID   |
|--------|---------|-------|-------|----------|

## D7:D6 Game ROM select

|   00 | $68000-69FFF   |
|------|----------------|
|   01 | $6A000-6BFFF   |
|   10 | $6C000-6DFFF   |
|   11 | $6E000-6FFFF   |

## D5:D4 BASIC ROM select

00

$60000-61FFF

01

$62000-63FFF

10

$64000-65FFF

11 $66000-67FFF

## D3 PBI button enable

0 PBI button disabled

1 PBI button enabled

## D2 PBI emulation enable

0

PBI emulation disabled

1 PBI emulation enabled

## D1:D0 PBI device ID select (PBI emulation enabled only)

00

01

PBI device ID 0 ($01)

PBI device ID 2 ($04)

10 PBI device ID 4 ($10)

11 PBI device ID 6 ($40)

## $D383 COLDF - Cold reset flag (read/write; read-only once config locked)

<!-- image -->

## D7 Cold reset flag

0 Last reset was warm reset

1 Last reset was cold reset

The cold reset flag is automatically set to 1 by the hardware on power-up, and can be set or cleared under software control. This is used to reliably distinguish between cold and warm resets, as its state persists across a warm reset. Once config lock is established, this register becomes read-only until the next reset.

## $D384 PBI button status (read only)

<!-- image -->

| BTN RD5   | 0   |
|-----------|-----|

## D7 PBI button status

0 PBI button feature disabled

1 PBI button feature enabled

## D6 External cartridge RD5 sense

0 External cartridge $A000-BFFF unmapped

1 External cartridge $A000-BFFF mapped

The PBI button status register is used to sense whether the PBI button feature is enabled and to check whether it has been pressed. Bit 6 indicates whether the external cartridge is attempting to map $A000-BFFF; this is used to sense the reset button on the SIDE 2 cartridge, since that button re-enables the banking window at bank 0.

This register is always visible even if the PBI emulation and PBI button features are disabled.

## $D3E2 RTCIN - Real-time clock input (read only)

<!-- image -->

## D3 Serial Data In (SDI) line

Senses the Serial Data In (SDI) line used to receive data from the DS1305 real time clock.

## $D3E2 RTCOUT - Real-time clock output (write only)

<!-- image -->

| Ignored   | SDO   | SCL.   | CE   |
|-----------|-------|--------|------|

D2 Serial Data Out (SDO) signal

D1 Serial Clock (SCLK) signal

D0 DS1305 Chip Enable (CE) signal

0 DS1305 not selected

1 DS1305 selected

Used to drive the output signals on the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) bus to which the DS1305 RTC is connected. The chip must be enabled through the CE bit, and then SCLK toggled to either shift data into the chip a bit at a time through SDO or out a bit at a time through SDI.

Consult the DS1305 datasheet for required timing specifications. The general required precautions, for a DS1305 running at 2.0-3.3V and the standard 1.79MHz machine clock:

- Avoid writing to RTCOUT with read/modify/write instructions, due to the back-to-back writes with different values.
- Toggle SCLK no faster than every third cycle.
- Wait at least one cycle after a write to SCLK before reading SDI during reads.
- The first transition of SCLK must occur at least 7 cycles after CE is asserted.
- CE must be inactive for at least 7 cycles before being asserted again.

## $D5E0 SDXCTL - SDX module control (write only; internal cartridge enabled only)

<!-- image -->

| INT/EXT   | SDXBANK   |
|-----------|-----------|

## D7:D6 Internal/external cartridge enable

|   0x | Internal cartridge only enabled          |
|------|------------------------------------------|
|   10 | External cartridge only enabled          |
|   11 | Internal and external cartridge disabled |

D5:D0 Internal cartridge bank

Controls both the internal cartridge, intended for SpartaDOS X (SDX), and the external cartridge. Both the $8000-9FFF and $A000-BFFF windows of the external cartridge are controlled together. If the PBI button feature is enabled, the $A000-BFFF window of the external cartridge is disabled even if the external cartridge is enabled. However, the $8000-9FFF window is unaffected.

This register is forced to $80 whenever the SDX module is disabled.

## Warning

Writes to SDXCTL are not excluded from the cartridge control (CCTL) region, and so any writes to $D5E0 will be handled by both U1MB and the external cartridge.

