## 12.5 APE Warp+ OS 32-in-1

The APE Warp+ OS 32-in-1 is a small internal device from AtariMax that replaces the OS ROM in an XL/XE computer with bank-switched flash ROM, allowing access to 32 different OS ROM images switchable under software control.

## Hardware connections

The Warp+ OS has access to A0-A13 and the data bus through the OS ROM socket, but not R/W or A14-A15. Thus, it can map flash ROM within the OS and Self-Test ROM address spaces, but not anywhere else. It also has three external connections to the Select button, PIA port B bit 7, and the reset signal. The PB7 and reset signal connections are bidirectional, allowing the Warp+ OS to drive the signals as well as sense them.

## Flash ROM

4Mbit (512KB) of flash ROM provides the OS slots for the Warp+ OS, divided into 32 slots of 16KB each. Each slot uses the same mapping as the standard XL/XE OS ROM, with the first 4K mapped to $C000-CFFF, the next 2K to the self-test window at $5000-57FF, and the last 10K to $D800-FFFF.

The last slot ($1F) is used for the menu. Aside from being directly reachable with Select+Reset, it is simply mapped as an OS ROM image like the rest of the slots. In particular, during normal operation it is not run as a pre-OS like the Ultimate1MB BIOS, but skipped entirely with the computer booting up directly on the selected OS slot without software intervention.

Because the hardware lacks sufficient bus connections to fully decode the OS region or to detect writes, it is not possible to switch the Warp+ OS's flash ROM to autoselect mode or to program/erase it from the computer itself.

## PB7 communications protocol

The self-test enable signal on PIA port B bit 7 is used for bidirectional communications with the Warp+ OS. A low-speed asynchronous serial stream is sent over this signal in either direction, with start+stop bits and 8 data bits LSB-first. The baud rate is low, about 1100 baud.

Both commands and responses are sent as three-byte packets, with the first byte being a signature byte and the second and third bytes the same. This provides some protection against false commands when toggling the selftest ROM or communication errors. Commands are of the form $55 XX XX and replies $AA YY YY.

## Reading the current slot selection

A $55 20 20 command queries the current ROM slot, returned as $AA YY YY where YY is the current slot in the range $00-1F. This reads the slot setting in NVRAM. It is not necessarily the currently active slot, as this command is also used by the menu OS in slot $1F.

## Selecting a slot

Writing a $55 XX XX command with XX in $00-1F selects that as the new slot, writing it to NVRAM and remapping the OS ROM address space to the corresponding flash memory. The computer is also reset to start up with the new OS ROM image.

## Forced menu entry

A Select+Reset key combination will restart the computer in the menu stored in slot $1F. This does not change the slot setting in NVRAM. The Select key is sensed in hardware, so it cannot be blocked or repurposed in software.

There is no corresponding hardware support for the Option key, which is sensed in software within the menu code for the Option+Select+Reset shortcut to enter APE remote control mode.

