## 12.6 Bit-3 Full-View 80

The Bit-3 Full-View 80 is an add-on card that replaces the RAM card in slot 3 to provide 80-column display capability in an Atari 800. The use of RAM card slot 3 allows the Full View 80 to map memory ranges that are not available from the cartridge port, at the cost of requiring a 32K card in another slot to maintain 48K RAM.

## CRTC

The 80 column display is driven by a Synertek 6545-1 CRTC, which provides the video timing and fetches characters from a 2K static RAM. The CRTC is mapped to $D580-D581, with writes to $D580 selecting a CRTC register to read or write through $D581, and reads from $D580 reading the CRTC status register.

## Video memory

CPU access to VRAM is exclusively through the CRTC. As the CRTC requires full access to VRAM during active display, the CPU can only read or write VRAM during blanking periods. This is mediated by a transparent memory addressing mechanism exclusive to the Synertek version of the 6545, where the SY6545-1 automatically generates update cycles to VRAM during blanking times based on an update address register pair. 82

[82] [SY6545-1-AN3]

CRTC registers $12 and $13 contain the high and low address bytes of the update address. Selecting the dummy register $1F -- without needing an explicit read or write -- clears the update ready bit 7 in the status register and schedules an update at the next available blanking time. The byte read is automatically latched into $D583. Writing to $D585 causes the CRTC to repeat the update cycle to trigger the write to VRAM at the next available interval. After a read or write, the update address is auto-incremented.

VRAM addresses $0000-07FF are deliberately mirrored at $0800-0FFF so that the CRTC display address can wrap around the RAM for scrolling purposes.

## Character generator

The character map is stored in 2K of static RAM and translated to character bitmaps through a character generator stored in a 4K EPROM. Each character is stored with pixels in LSB-to-MSB bit order, reversed from ANTIC, and with 16 bytes for a 8x16 character matrix. The default CRTC settings used by the firmware only use the first 10 rows for an 8x10 matrix.

Bit 7 of each character cell selects inverse video. However, the character generator EPROM still stores 256 characters, and the second 128 characters corresponding to inverse video are uninverted in the EPROM, with inversion occurring externally.

## Video switch

The Full-View 80 is designed to pass the standard ANTIC+GTIA video output through its own output when not enabled. The video output can be switched between the 40-column and 80-column display under software control via bit 3 of $D508.

## Video timing

The default video timing set by the firmware is for 113x26 character cells of 8x10 with 4 extra scan lines, at a dot clock of 2×F sc (14.31MHz). This gives a horizontal rate of 15.839KHz, vertical 59.995Hz, and a pixel aspect ratio (PAR) of 6 ÷ 14 = 0.429.

## Firmware

The firmware is stored in a second 4K EPROM as 16 banks of 256 bytes each, mapped into $D600-D6FF.

## Control register

Write-only register $D508 controls firmware bank switching and video output.

Table 115: Bit-3 Full-View 80 $D508 register bits

<!-- image -->

| Bit   | Description                                        |
|-------|----------------------------------------------------|
| Bit 5 | Firmware bank bit 3                                |
| Bit 4 | Video switch (1 = 80-column, 0 = GTIA output)      |
| Bit 3 | 80-column video blank (1 = blanked, 0 = unblanked) |
| Bit 2 | Firmware bank bit 2                                |
| Bit 1 | Firmware bank bit 1                                |
| Bit 0 | Firmware bank bit 0                                |

$D508 is reset to $00 on power-up.

