## 1.1 Introduction

This document describes the hardware programming model used by Altirra, an emulator for the Atari 8-bit series of home computers, including the 400, 800, 600XL, 800XL, 1200XL, 130XE, and XEGS models. Although the emulator provides a virtual programming environment, it is intended to mimic the actual hardware. This document attempts to describe the hardware in detail as the target to which the emulator aspires to imitate. Some of this information has been collected from both official and unofficial sources, and some of it has been determined by hand through testing on a real, still functioning Atari 800XL.

While I've spent a lot of time tracking down details myself, I have to acknowledge the substantial amount of literature already available which provided background for this document. First and foremost, I'm indebted to the technical staff behind the Atari Home Computer System Hardware Manual , which did a very good job of describing the behavior and programming specifications for the official functionality in the Atari hardware, and which should be considered required reading prior to this document. Similar shout-outs go to the authors of Atari's OS Manual , which similarly documents the software side, and to Ian Chadwick and his Mapping the Atari, Revised Edition , which contains the most detailed and complete memory map of the Atari I know of.

If you have the time and inclination, please check out my Altirra emulator, available at the following web address. You can also find the latest version of this manual there.

http://www.virtualdub.org/altirra.html

-- Avery Lee

