## 1.2 Conventions in this manual

## Number format

Unless specified, 6502 conventions are used. Numbers without a prefix are given in base 10 (decimal), numbers prefixed by $ are given in base 16 (hexadecimal), and numbers prefixed by % are base 2 (binary).

In sections that describe Z80-based devices, Intel-style hex conventions are used instead with hex numbers ending in H, i.e. 50H.

## Checksums

Where CRC32 values are given for firmware data, the CRC32 polynomial and algorithm is the same as that used by the Zip archive format, zlib, gzip, and the PNG image format. This is not to be confused with CRC32C, which uses a different polynomial and produces different values for the same data.

## Scan line timing

A significant number of hardware events with interesting timing occur relative to a particular offset within the timing of a scan line , which is one horizontal sweep of the display CRT beam. Many activities within the hardware occur at specific positions within a scan line and it is frequently useful to synchronize the CPU to scan line timing. There are 114 machine cycles for each scan line.

There is no program visible horizontal position counter in the Atari hardware. To make it easier to refer to specific offsets within a scan line, the cycles within a scan line are numbered from 0-113 in this manual, where cycle 0 corresponds to the missile DMA at the beginning of a scan line. This is also approximately the beginning of horizontal sync in the output video signal. Altirra also uses this convention in its debugger.

## Deadlines

Sometimes it is necessary for the CPU to write to a hardware register before or after a particular deadline to produce a desired behavior. For purposes here, A CPU write to a register on cycle N satisfies a requirement to write by cycle N , before cycle N+1 , and after cycle N-1 . The cycle number is always in terms of the actual write cycle from the CPU and not the write instruction. For instance, an INC NMIRES instruction that begins execution on cycle 90 writes to NMIRES at cycles 95 and cycle 96, assuming no DMA contention.

## Event timing

An event observable by a register is said to occur on a particular cycle when that is the first cycle in which a read of that register reflects the event. For instance, if an interrupt bit activates in IRQST on cycle 95 of a scan line, it means that reading the register on or prior to cycle 94 will not show the interrupt and reading it on or after cycle 95 will.

In most cases, event timing is described in this manual in terms of when it becomes visible to program execution. For instance, interrupts are described according to when the 6502 can either sense a change in interrupt status or begins executing an interrupt routine, and not when the IRQ signal on 6502 is asserted. An exception is externally visible outputs, such as video, audio, and I/O.

## Active low and active high signals

In hardware designs, the signals may be designated as either active low or active high depending on the

interpretation of the circuit design. The IRQ line on the CPU, for instance, is an active low signal and is activated by pulling the signal line to the low state. On the other hand, the RD5 signal from the cartridge that maps $A000BFFF is active high, and is pulled up to +5V to signal that cartridge ROM is present.

To avoid confusion, this manual uses the terms asserted and negated to indicate the state of a signal line. An active low signal is asserted in the low state, and negated in the high state; an active high signal is asserted in the high state and negated in the low state.

