## 1.3 What's new in this edition

## This release

- CPU
- Corrected undocumented opcode table entries for opcodes $97 (SAX zp,Y), $BF (LAX abs,Y), and $F7 (ISB zp,X).
- ANTIC
- Expanded information on the hires-last-line bug and effects on horizontal/vertical sync.
- POKEY
- Added more information on paddle / pot scan, including cycle timing, charging/discharge behavior, and unconnected and grounded inputs.
- Expanded information about phantom key formation.
- Cartridges
- Added Microchip SST39SF010 and SST39SF040 chips as possibilities for the MaxFlash 1Mbit and 8Mbit cartridges.
- Added The Multiplexer.
- Serial I/O bus
- Added information on protocol resynchronization behavior.
- Expanded information on the 850 Interface Module.
- Added information on 1025 and 1029 line overflow behavior.
- Internal devices
- VideoBoard XE
- Fixed references to overlay stride being 11 bit instead of 12 bit.
- Added behavior of attribute map overscrolling.
- Disk drives
- Added information about double sided disk sector mappings.
- Added information about double density boot sector encoding.
- Indus GT: Added note about SIO command interrupt connection.
- I.S. Plate: Added information about track buffering, high-speed support, and custom formatting.
- Percom: Added density detection behavior.
- Added Speedy XF.
- Parallel Bus Interface
- Added Black Box Floppy Board.

## 2024-09-21 release

- ANTIC
- Fixed a typo in the description of a vertically stretched IR mode 2 line: $80-DF is affected, not $80BF.
- Rewrote abnormal DMA section and added information on DMACTL related triggers.
- POKEY
- Corrected the description of serial port clock reset via SKCTL.
- GTIA
- Fixed a typo in the wide playfield horizontal range: the last color clock of the wide playfield is $DD, not $DF.
- Clarified right border for GTIA mode 10.
- Serial I/O Bus
- Expanded general description of Status commands.
- Added 820, 1025, and 1029 printers.
- Added 850 parallel port interface information.
- Corrected 850 baud rate table, as %1111 selects 9600 instead of 19200 baud.
- Disk Drives
- Added information on the Super Archiver and the Bit-Writer.
- Added $FF command to 810 revision E firmware command list and updated names to match recently revealed source code.
- Physical Disk Format
- Expanded information on precise requirements for the FDC to sync to address and data marks.
- Firmware Database
- New appendix focusing specifically on firmware images with associated signatures.

## 2023-10-09 release

- ANTIC
- Fixed a long standing off-by-one error in the VCOUNT cycle numbers from when the horizontal cycle numbers were adjusted in this doc by -1, then adjusted back; the +1 was not reapplied to the VCOUNT numbers.
- Added information about precise timing of interrupts that occur during a WSYNC wait.
- POKEY
- Clarified serial input/output clock selection table and added captures of SIO clock in/out signals.
- CTIA/GTIA
- Added horizontal/vertical sync timing information, including effects of the ANTIC hires bug.

- Cartridges
- Corrected typo in banking bit range for AtariMax 8Mbit cartridges.
- Serial I/O bus
- Added information about the 835 modem.
- Expanded information about the 1030 modem.
- Disk Drives
- 810: Added note about rev. E FDC error codes.
- 1050: Added write protect error behavior.
- Happy 1050: Added information about relations between Happy 1050 firmware revisions and base 1050 firmware revisions.
- XF551: Added note about oversize firmware ROM and lower 4K CRCs.
- Parallel Bus Interface
- Added interaction between Ultimate1MB extended memory and PBI memory overlays.
- VBXE: Expanded MEMAC window description.
- Reference
- Corrected swapped serial input and keyboard overrun bits in register grid (the description was fine).
- Physical Disk Format
- Corrected error in DAM handling: post-1771 FDCs report bit 1, not bit 0, of the Data Address Mark.
- Analog Video Model
- New section on synchronization and fake interlace behavior.

## 2023-05-29 release

- Accessories
- Stack Lightpen.
- Cartridges
- SIDE 2: Added missing CF select bit.
- Serial I/O bus
- Fixed typo in protocol diagram that showed 10-18 ms for the ACK-to-data delay instead of 1.0-1.8 ms.
- 1030: Additional timing and dialing information.
- Disk drives
- Happy 1050: Detailed memory map and additional caching behavior.
- XF551: Added third firmware version between 7.4 and 7.7.
- Added 1450XLD parallel disk drive.

- Parallel Bus Interface
- MIO: Fixed description of $D1FE bit 4, which controls SEL and not MSG.
- MIO: Fixed inverted IRQ status bits.
- Added 1400XL/1450XLD V: and T: devices.

## 2022-11-29 release

- Disk drives
- Added info about XF551 firmware rev. 7.4 and 7.7 differences.
- Added US Doubler firmware information.
- POKEY
- More details on initialization mode.
- Expanded on many audio topics.
- Rotated around some of the noise generator patterns to canonically start from initialization state.
- Cycle-precise timer behavior, including STIMER and AUDF1-4 write timing.

## 2022-07-07 release

- Fixed some typos referring to the PIA chip number as 6522 instead of 6520.
- CPU
- Fixed typo regarding B flag, which is pushed set on the stack for a BRK and cleared for IRQ/NMI.
- ANTIC
- Fixed typo in Display list &gt; Suspended display list DMA: the last IR byte is repeated when display list DMA is disabled .
- Fixed incorrect /RNMI timing - it only needs to be asserted across one leading edge of VBLANK, not two.
- Accessories
- Expanded information on light pens.
- Added ComputerEyes Video Acquisition System.
- Disk drives
- Added info on 1050 firmware revision E.

## 2022-01-03 release

- ANTIC
- Refresh row address counter is not cleared on reset.
- Disk drives
- Clarified receive timing for Happy 1050 and added info about error handling when track buffering is

enabled.

- Added step timing for Speedy 1050.
- Parallel Bus Interface
- Corrected reserved ranges for PBI ($D6xx and D7xx instead of $D5xx and D6xx).
- Appendices
- Added appendix on physical tape format.

## 2021-10-02 release

- System architecture
- Added brief overview of top-level system architecture.
- CPU
- Expanded discussion of flags.
- ANTIC
- Fixed erroneous starting cycles for playfield DMA in the text (the charts were correct).
- POKEY
- Clarified some details about counter timing and distortion selection.
- Added section on two-tone counter timing.
- Accessories
- Note on XEP80 baud rate limits, row advance timing anomaly, and delete line behavior.
- Cartridges
- New section on SIDE 3.
- Serial I/O bus
- New section on 820 Printer.
- Disk drives
- Removed Indus GT from list of disk drives that do not update PERCOM block on density detection.
- Expanded information on PERCOM disk drive firmware revisions.
- Physical disk format
- Added measured capture range for bit cell periods.
- Reference
- Fixed swapped mode reference for the CHBASE register.
- Fixed missing POTGO register in register listing.

## 2020-10-23 release

- Disk drives

- Fixed swapped PB0 and PB7 definitions for 1050 drives.
- Added behavior of various drives with no disk inserted.
- Clarified FDC handling of the head/side address field value.
- Added firmware revision information for 1050, Indus GT, and Percom RFD.
- Added Atari 815.
- Added Percom AT88-S1 and AT88-SPD.
- Internal devices
- Added Bit-3 Full-View 80.
- Added Atari 1090 80 Column Video Card.

## 2019-12-30 release

- System control
- Fixed a typo in the PAL clock rate.
- ANTIC
- Timing and behavior for the 400/800 System Reset NMI, even on XL/XE computers.
- GTIA
- Clarified listed behavior for mode 9 combining with the fifth player (PF3) and for mode 11 regarding unusual COLBK values.
- POKEY
- Fixed a typo in the keyboard layout for the Return key.
- Disk drives
- Fixed 810 port B entries being listed in reversed order.
- Added information on the 810 Turbo, Astra 1001 / The "One", and Amdek AMDC-I/II.
- Added info on specific behaviors of the 6532 RIOT and 177X/277X floppy drive controllers.
- Added info on Happy 1050 US Doubler emulation data corruption bug.
- Added info on XF551 format behavior.
- Internal devices
- Corrected VBXE blitter pattern width bitfield from 7 to 6 bits.
- Added section on APE Warp+ 32-in-1.
- New appendices for analog video and audio models.

## 2018-08-12 release

- CPU: Clarified exact rules for when a branch crosses a page.
- CPU: Fixed some erroneous illegal instructions in the 6502 opcode chart.

- ANTIC: Fixed wrong modes being listed for 512 byte / 1K character set size.
- POKEY: Additional information about high-pass filter timing.
- GTIA:
- New section on NTSC and PAL artifacting.
- Clarified behavior of GR.9/GR.11 with fifth player or background having non-zero luma for GR.9 or hue for GR.11.
- Disk: Added information about task sequencing in disk drive controllers, I.S. Plate, sector interleaving order used by disk drive firmware, XF551 FDC error codes, long sector behavior, 810 revision B firmware, US Doubler hardware and commands, fixed incorrect sector ranges for XF551 back side encoding.

## 2017-05-17 release

- Additional light pen information.
- Rewritten and expanded section on POKEY's serial port hardware, including precise timing diagrams.
- MyIDE-II CompactFlash reset behavior.
- SX212 power-on behavior.
- New chapter on disk drives, including information on the Happy 810, Happy 1050, ATR8000, Percom RFD-40S1, and the hardware for the 810, 1050, XF551, and Indus GT.

## 2016-03-25 release

- 65C816 opcode table.
- 800 floating I/O data bus.
- POKEY: Additional details on serial port behavior and keyboard and paddle scans.
- Additional XEP-80 details.
- Controllers: CX-20 Driving Controller, CX-21/23/50 Keyboard Controller.
- New device info: Indus GT disk drive, Corvus Disk Interface, Pocket Modem.
- 810 and 1050 updates: long sector behavior, FDC status.
- SIDE 2 corrections.
- Physical disk format: sector length behavior.

## 2015-07-05 release

- System: Added information about floating PIA port B bits.
- CPU: Added new sections on new 65C816 functionality, undocumented 6502 opcodes, and opcode tables.
- ANTIC: New sections on display timing, effects of extending the height of mode lines.
- POKEY: Added info about keyboard conflicts.

- GTIA: Added info about color generation.
- New chapter on cartridges: AtariMax, SIC!, SIDE, Corina, R-Time 8, Veronica.
- New chapter on Parallel Bus Interface devices: Black Box, Multi I/O.
- Additional device information: R-Verter, MidiMate, Ultimate1MB, VideoBoard XE.
- Additional XEP-80 commands.
- New appendices on polynomial counters and physical floppy disk formats.

## 2014-04-27 release

- CPU: Added section on 65C02 and 65C816 compatibility issues.
- System Control: Added information on Parallel Bus Interface IRQs.
- POKEY: Added keyboard scan code table.
- GTIA: Updated with new table of player/missile/playfield priority conflicts and information about priority conflicts in GTIA modes.
- Serial I/O: Now has its own chapter, including information about type 0-4 polling and device-provided relocatable loaders.
- 850: Corrected errors in the description of the Write command, expanded description of the Stream command, and added sections on the 850 bootstrap process.
- Disk: Added more details on 810 FDC controller status and command error conditions, and a new section about disk anomalies used by protection mechanisms.
- New section on XEP80 device.
- Reference: Updated to note guarantees on PAL register bits, and fixed errors in PACTL listing and register quick reference.

## 2013-05-14 release

- ANTIC updates:
- Bus activity during WSYNC.
- Abnormal playfield DMA.
- GTIA updates:
- Border behavior in mode 10.
- Player/missile shift details and lockup state.
- POKEY updates:
- Polynomial counter patterns and timing behaviors.

## 2012-09-15 release

- Cycle numbers have been readjusted back so that cycle 0 is once again the missile DMA fetch.
- PIA corrections and interrupt behavior.

- CPU interrupt acknowledge timing.
- Parallel Bus Interface (PBI) information.
- XEGS game ROM selection and keyboard sense.
- ANTIC updates:
- Virtual playfield DMA
- Vertically scrolled jump instructions
- VSCROL vs. DLI timing
- POKEY updates:
- Additional serial port initializing and timing information
- GTIA updates:
- Lo-res mode 10 anomaly
- Additional peripheral documentation:
- CX-85 numerical keypad
- 850 Interface Module
- 1030 Modem
- 810, 1050, and XF551 Disk Drives
- Generic SIO protocol
- Fixed backwards serial port and keyboard overrun bits in SKCTL reference.
- Fixed swapped Control and Shift bits in KBCODE reference.
- Removed incorrect location of international character set from memory map; this is an OS convention anyway, not inherent in hardware.

## 2010-11-23 release

- 5200 SuperSystem documentation.
- BRK anomalies, decimal mode, and I flag timing.
- ANTIC horizontal scrolling bug.
- NMIST timing.
- Temperature sensitive POKEY and GTIA behaviors.
- Keyboard scan behavior.
- All scan line cycle numbers have been corrected to match the horizontal position counter (one less than previous).

