## 1.4 Concepts

## Program visible (observable) behavior

A behavior or effect in the hardware which can be detected by a running program is program visible or observable . Most of the hardware behavior described in this manual is program visible. For instance, the serialization behavior of the player/missile registers in GTIA is program visible because it can be detected through the collision registers. Any program-visible behavior is detectable by program code and can therefore be checked to detect incomplete emulation or broken hardware.

In contrast, a non program visible behavior cannot be detected by a running program: there is no way for an Atari program to detect the colors produced by the GTIA priority logic unless external hardware provides a loopback path.

## Byte order (endian)

The 6502 is a little endian processor and therefore writes words with the lower order byte at the lower address of the byte pair. The hardware follows the same convention: in the few cases where word registers exist or words are fetched, the byte with the lower address is the lower order byte.

The opposite case is a big endian convention, where the higher order byte comes before the lower order byte. The 6809 is an example of a CPU that uses big endian byte ordering, and this endianness is also used in Percom block data because the convention originated in Percom's 6809-based disk drives.

## Bit order

Within a byte, bit 7 is the most significant bit (MSB), and bit 0 is the least significant bit (LSB). A left shift moves bits toward the MSB from the LSB, and is equivalent to multiplying by a power of two.

Whenever data in a byte represents graphics patterns, the left-most (MSB) pixel is displayed on the left side on screen. For 2-bit and 4-bit pixels, each contiguous group of 2 or 4 bits determines the pixel color, packed from MSB to LSB in left to right order. Within each pixel, the bits are ordered the same as for a regular integer, allowing arithmetic operations to function on those pixels. Thus, %1000 in a 16-luminance mode selects luminance 8, and is packed as %1000xxxx in the left pixel of a byte.

A bit reversal or reverse bits operation flips the order of the bits, exchanging bits 0 and 7, bits 1 and 6, etc. This has a few applications, including horizontally flipping 1-bit playfield or player/missile graphics, and compensating for different shift orders in serial protocols.

## Address alignment

The timing of certain CPU operations and the behavior of DMA by ANTIC can depend on the addresses of bytes within a block of memory. The start of a block of memory is said to be aligned to a particular boundary if it is a multiple of that value. For instance, the address $0800 is aligned to a 1K boundary because $0800 is divisible by a 1K block size ($0400 bytes). The address $0A00, however, is not.

A memory block crosses an alignment boundary if the addresses of the first and last bytes result in different values when divided by the alignment block size. A 40 byte block at $090A-0931 is contained within a 1K boundary, whereas $07FF-0826 crosses the 1K boundary at $0800. There are two specific behaviors associated with crossing such a boundary. One is that the 6502 sometimes requires an extra cycle when boundary is crossed; another is that the 6502 or ANTIC may fail to cross an alignment boundary and wrap addresses within the alignment block instead.

A page is a 256 byte block of memory aligned on a 256 byte boundary. Many operations in the 6502 require accesses to specific pages or require extra cycles when indexing causes address arithmetic to produce a final address in a different page. Two 16-bit addresses have the same page if their first two hex digits are the same, i.e. $A900 and $A947.

## Read-only and write-only registers

Most registers in the hardware are either read-only or write-only: you cannot read a write-only register or write to a read-only register. The address locations are also often shared between different read-only and write-only registers, meaning that an attempt to use an unsupported memory operation will actually access the wrong register. For instance, although the GTIA's HPOSP0 register is set by writing to $D000, it can't be read at that address; attempting to read $D000 gives M0PF instead.

There are a few notable exceptions where registers are read/write, such as CONSOL in GTIA and the data direction registers in the PIA. Even in those cases, it is often that the read address does not exactly read back the same register as the write address. For instance, reading CONSOL or PORTA doesn't actually read back the values written to the write register; it actually reads the input port connected to the same signal as the output port controlled by the write register, which means it can be different when the signal is being driven externally (e.g. the Start button being held down).

## Partial registers

In some cases, an address maps to registers that have less than 8 bits. In the case of a write, the extra bits are ignored and lost. For a read, the extra unused bits are usually driven to a stable state by the chip, but this is not always the case. For example, the R-Time 8 only drives the low four data bits and leaves the higher ones floating. The PDVI register of the Parallel Bus Interface at $D1FF is a more extreme example, as it is actually a composite of single status bits from each device, leaving the bits for non-present devices floating.

## Shadow registers

Because not being able to read back write-only registers makes saving and restoring registers difficult, the OS maintains a number of shadow registers in the kernel database to allow reading back the value of those registers. By updating the shadow register whenever the hardware register is updated, the hardware register can be "read back" by reading the shadow register instead. This is purely a software convention, however, and using shadow registers is not required. It also requires an additional write for every update to the hardware register.

## Strobe registers

Some hardware registers, such as POTGO and WSYNC, are strobe registers. These registers trigger an action in the hardware when written by the CPU. The value written to the register is irrelevant and ignored, and the strobe is activated even if the same value is written multiple times.

There are also registers that will trigger changes on a read cycle. The PIA data registers are examples, as reading them clears pending interrupts. Similarly, some cartridge banking hardware only decodes addresses without checking the read/write line and thus respond to a read by switching cartridge banks.

## Latched (sticky) bits

Latched bits are activated when an event occurs and stay in that state until reset. Most of the interrupt status bits in IRQST work that way, asserting IRQ on the CPU until the interrupt is acknowledged.

## Incomplete address decoding (aliasing or mirroring)

Address decoding is the hardware process of determining if a memory address corresponds to a particular device. A device with full address decoding responds only to the specific addresses it is designed. For efficiency reasons, many hardware devices on the Atari only partially decode addresses by checking a subset of address bits. An example is the PIA, which only contains four addressable locations but is assigned a 256 byte region at $D300-D3FF. Because bits 2-7 of the address are ignored, the PIA is mirrored 64 times within this address space. This is also called aliasing , because two or more addresses serve as aliases for the same memory location.

Although all of the mirror addresses of a hardware register are equivalent, there is typically still a canonical address associated with that register, the address intended to be used. Using the canonical address of a register is less likely to run into problems in expanded configurations. For instance, while $D3C0 is a valid address to access the PORTA register on stock hardware, it may be overlaid and repurposed by expansion hardware.

## Overlapped decoding

As multiple circuits can independently decode addresses, it is possible for more than one device to decode and respond to the same address, when they are on the same bus. As the MMU handles most decoding in the base computer with non-overlapping address ranges, this is more common when the devices decode addresses independently of the MMU or off of the same MMU select signal.

In the case of a write, all devices accept and respond to the write in parallel, using the same data. This occurs in some stacked cartridge configurations, for instance, where the bottom cartridge does not exclude its register ranges from the forwarded signals passed to the pass-through cartridge port.

Overlapping reads result in a tug-of-war between the devices over the data bus, with conflicts causing one device to try to pull the data line down to 0 while the other to 1, and the result depending on which device wins. This is considered an undesirable electric condition due to the two devices effectively tying +V to ground, but is typically short-lived enough to avoid any ill-effects other than garbled returned data.

## Power-on state

Individual hardware states may or may not be defined on power-on. The reset logic does ensure that circuits that take a reset signal are reset on power-up, and critical states such as NMIEN in ANTIC and the OS ROM enable are reset to ensure that the system can boot reliably. However, some states are not reset and are undefined on power-on.

In practice, non-reset states do have some bias as to their power-on state. The strongest bias is toward their last state, if the computer was powered off and then back on for a short period. The logic circuits will tend to keep their last state for up to several seconds, with increasing chance that the state is randomly lost with each second. If too much time passes and the system is powered up "cold", however, then the power-on state will tend to be influenced by the circuit design, which will bias the circuit strongly toward a particular polarity. This is the reason that dynamic RAM tends to power up with a characteristic stripe pattern that matches the memory bank configuration inside of the chip. In a "lukewarm" boot where the system has been powered off long enough for some but not all of the memory bits to have decayed, memory or hardware state bits will show a noisy mix of the last powered state and the natural cold power-on state of the circuits.

In some other cases where the circuit is well-balanced, the power-on state may essentially be random noise, such as with static RAMs.

## Machine cycles (clocks)

Although most of the system actually runs at a faster rate, the smallest atomic unit of time for CPU execution is a

single cycle at approximately 1.8MHz. All CPU instructions must begin and end on a cycle boundary; all reads and writes to registers must take place on a particular cycle. Unless otherwise specified, all cycles in this document refer to machine cycles.

## Color clock

Much of the graphics system in the Atari runs at the speed of the color clock , which for NTSC machines runs at the color subcarrier (3.579545MHz). A color cycle is completed every time the color clock advances. The highest resolution possible for most graphics is determined by this clock, which produces 160 low resolution pixels across at standard playfield width. High resolution displays run at twice this frequency, for a dot clock of 7MHz, but only luminance effects are possible at this rate. Playfield and sprite positioning also occur at color clock rate.

There are two color cycles for every machine cycle. On PAL machines, where the color subcarrier is at a much higher frequency, most of the faster processes within GTIA still occur at twice the machine cycle rate.

## Machine-specific behavior

There are unfortunately a few cases in which marginal timing causes systems to differ in behavior. Examples are the interrupt delay between POKEY and the 6502 and the behavior of the GTIA fifth player bit. In some cases this can even manifest as temperature sensitivity, where a system will change behavior once a certain involved chip has warmed up and display erratic behavior during the transition. It is best that code be written to avoid dependency on such cases and to tolerate variance between systems.

